Effects of Nutritional Stress and Socio-Economic Status on Maternal Mortality in Six German Villages, 1766–1863

Francesco Scalone
University of Bologna

We examined the effects of nutritional stress on maternal mortality arising from short-term economic crises in eighteenth-century and nineteenth-century Germany, and how these effects might have been mitigated by socio-economic status. Historical data from six German villages were used to assess how socio-economic conditions and short-term economic crises following poor harvests may have affected maternal mortality. The results show that one year after an increase in grain prices, the risk of maternal death increased significantly amongst the wives of those working outside the agricultural sector, more so than for the wives of those working on farms. Nutritional crises seem to have had a significantly stronger impact on maternal mortality in the period 2–6 weeks after childbirth when mothers were most prone to infections and indirect obstetrical causes of maternal death. The findings indicate that both nutritional stress and socio-economic factors contributed to maternal mortality.

Keywords: maternal mortality; historical demography; socio-economic status; economic stress; grain prices; maternal nutritional status

Introduction

During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, maternal mortality rates in Western countries were generally high, although they did fluctuate significantly. They began a steady and permanent decline in the 1930s when access to maternity care improved substantially and antibiotics became available. The downward trajectory continued, thanks to significant improvements in blood transfusion technology, resuscitation techniques, and anesthesia; the result of medical advances made during the Second World War. In general, the primary causes of maternal mortality—pre-eclampsia, hemorrhage, obstructed labor, infection, and complications from induced abortion—have not been considered to be directly related to nutrition. However, there is evidence that nutrition has a direct impact on maternal outcomes and the relationship between nutrition, socio-economic status, and maternal mortality remains poorly understood for both historical and contemporary populations. Although findings have been inconclusive, research on interventions involving nutritional supplements, carried out in less developed countries, has shown that improving nutritional status may help reduce maternal mortality. A better understanding of the impact of nutritional stress arising from short-term economic crises on maternal mortality in Western countries in the past may shed light on maternal mortality in today's less-developed countries, where conditions sometimes resemble those of the Western world before the demographic transition occurred and where access to modern obstetric care can still be limited.

Background

There is very little quantitative data available on the causes of maternal death before the twentieth century because death or burial records seldom contain reliable clinical diagnoses of the cause of death. Historically, two-thirds of maternal deaths in Sweden were directly due to obstetrical causes such as obstructed labor, eclampsia, hemorrhage, and sepsis, while one-third was due to indirect causes such as pneumonia, tuberculosis, dysentery, and heart disease. Contemporary studies on less-developed countries demonstrate that hemorrhage and other obstetric complications occur very soon after delivery, deaths from sepsis and infection are dominant in the following three weeks, and deaths from indirect causes within 29 and 42 days of delivery. Direct obstetric causes of death are frequently tied to the level of maternal care during or after childbirth, whereas indirect causes are more influenced by the overall health of the mother and her nutritional status.
In a study of the history of childbirth in the period 1850-1950 in Europe, the USA, Australia, and New Zealand, Loudon (1992a) found that the quality of assistance mothers received during childbirth was one of the main determinants of maternal mortality. More recent historical scholarship has drawn attention to the significance of socio-economic determinants, such as household structure and kinship networks, on maternal mortality in Croatia in the period 1750-1898 (Hammel and Gullickson 2004).

It has been generally believed that the quality of care pregnant and parturient mothers received was the strongest determinant of maternal mortality in historic populations. Malnutrition and poverty were thought to have played only a limited role because maternal mortality was considered to be impervious to nutritional status (Loudon 2000). Little scholarly attention has therefore been focused on how, before the demographic and health transitions, nutritional stress may have affected maternal mortality. Using a historical data set drawn from six German villages, the aim of the study reported in this paper was to assess the impact of nutritional stress arising from short-term economic crises on maternal mortality. The relationship between women’s nutritional and socio-economic status and their chances of surviving childbirth was re-examined, taking short-term, upward swings in the price of grain as indicators of nutritional stress. The study also examined how the effects of nutritional stress on rates of maternal mortality differed between women from different social strata.

Large-scale aggregative studies have demonstrated that overall mortality was, in general, sensitive to grain-price fluctuations in most of pre-industrial Europe (Galloway 1988; Lee 1989). However, using such macro-level analyses, historians have been unable to demonstrate that maternal mortality, as measured by the number of ‘maternal deaths per 1,000, 10,000, or 100,000 births’ (Loudon 1992a), was strongly affected by socio-economic conditions and it is generally accepted that ‘maternal mortality was remarkably insensitive to social and economic factors’ (Loudon 1992b). Studies conducted at a national level have also failed to find an association between levels of maternal mortality and gross national product (De Brouwere et al. 1998). Comparing trends in maternal mortality rates during the first decades of the nineteenth century in Western countries, Loudon (1992a, b) could not explain the evident differences between the USA, Britain, and the Netherlands by differences in prevailing socio-economic conditions. At the macro level, then, there is little evidence of an association between socio-economic conditions and maternal mortality.

On the other hand, using a micro-level event-history approach, researchers have successfully demonstrated that, historically, short-term economic crises, which resulted in nutritional crises, did affect infant and adult mortality in the populations of both Western and Far Eastern countries (Campbell et al. 2004). The study reported in this paper used similar micro-level event-history analysis to construct statistical models based on individual-level data from six German villages in the period between 1766 and 1863. These models examined how the nutritional stress engendered by short-term economic crises affected maternal mortality in the 42 days following childbirth. The complete data set for the six villages constructed by John Knodel (1988) was used, and the same price index developed for a previous analysis of reproductive behavior in these villages (Dribe and Scalone 2010) was adopted.

The next section of the paper provides background information on research on maternal mortality in the past, then briefly outlines the analytical framework before describing the area under study, the data used, and the methods applied. The empirical results are then presented, and a discussion concludes the paper.
Advances in immunological research have shown that single or multiple nutritional deficiencies affect the mechanisms of the immune system. Individuals suffering from poor nutritional status generally experience an increase in the frequency and severity of infections, although the scale of the increase depends, in part, on prevailing social and environmental circumstances. Malnutrition could, therefore, further depress the already compromised immune systems of pregnant and parturient women, increasing their risk of mortality at, or shortly after, childbirth.

The debate about the importance of nutritional status in reducing maternal mortality is an ongoing one. It is still not clear to what extent improvements in nutrition may improve maternal survival, nor what nutritional supplements should be given to whom or when. In addition to the gaps in our understanding of the role nutrition plays in maternal mortality, the paucity of historical data further hampers any attempts to determine the effect of nutrition on maternal mortality in the past.

Historically, the decline in maternal deaths was attributed solely to improvements in the quality of maternity care and not to improvements in diet. However, other claims suggest that improvements in nutrition, such as increased maternal levels of vitamin A or iron, should not be dismissed as factors possibly contributing to reductions in maternal mortality. The protective effect of vitamin A against puerperal infection was demonstrated in 1931 and further confirmed by a randomized trial of vitamin A supplementation in a Nepalese community. However, a more recent study could not provide evidence to support the role of vitamin A in protecting mothers against infection.

Deficiencies of calcium, vitamin D, or iron in early childhood can negatively affect adult stature, increasing the risk of obstructed labour. Severe malnutrition in childhood often leads to small pelvises in adult women, with a consequently higher risk of obstructed labour leading to maternal death, particularly in communities without easy access to health facilities.

In the nineteenth century, rickets caused by a lack of vitamin D in childhood was a major cause of obstructed labour. It is thought to have primarily affected women living in polluted, industrial cities, whose uptake of the vitamin was lowered through a lack of exposure to sunshine due to the presence of industrial smog.

The improved nutritional status of children born in the 1920s helped to lower the risks of obstructed labour when these women began their reproductive life in the 1940s.

In pre-industrial Europe, annual variations in grain prices were closely tied to the quantity of grain available for consumption and, consequently, to the overall standard of living. A bad harvest would lead to higher grain prices, or a ‘price shock’, which would, in turn, significantly increase mortality levels. The decrease in rates of survival could continue for several years after the price shock. Various studies have shown that different social groups reacted to the economic stress of a price shock in different ways, with the infant and adult mortality response to increased grain prices varying from one socio-economic group to another.

It is reasonable to expect, with regard to maternal mortality, that short-term changes in food prices may have had selective effects by socioeconomic status. Predictions suggest that mothers married to farmers would be less vulnerable during times of high prices than mothers whose husbands worked for a daily wage or were not directly involved in agriculture, since the latter groups could not rely on gaining access to supplies of grain stored on farms and their nutrition may have suffered as a consequence.
Estimates of adult mortality from family reconstitution data can be complicated; however, any potential bias is significantly reduced when calculating estimates of maternal mortality. It is generally assumed that if a woman's date of death was not recorded, she survived the critical period following childbirth (Knodel 1988).

An Ortssippenbuch includes couples who married locally or in another village and then migrated to the village referenced in the book. Births occurring before a mother’s immigration to one of the study villages were excluded to avoid biasing the results for maternal mortality. Only births taking place within the study villages were included. Including non-local births would bias the rates of maternal mortality downward, as presumably the mother would have survived long enough to move into the local village with the child and would be included in the genealogy (Knodel 1988).

Because stillbirths have no genealogical relevance, they possibly were under-registered. This under-registration could affect maternal mortality estimates since if a woman died following an unrecorded stillbirth, her death would not have been recorded in the reconstituted family history as following the birth of a child and therefore would not have been classified as a maternal death. 

The data set does provide records of stillbirths, although the proportion they form of all births varies considerably from village to village (Knodel 1988). The stillbirth rate in the six villages was 33 per 1,000 births during the period 1766-1863. This level is within the range estimated for other historical populations in Europe and the official statistics for Germany during the period 1875-1877 (Knodel 1988).

A total of 15,077 childbirth events involving 3,418 mothers occurred in the six study villages between 1766 and 1863, all included in the analysis. Of the 3,418 mothers, 152 died within 42 days after childbirth. This analysis employs models to estimate the effects of socio-economic status and nutritional stress arising from short-term economic crises on the risk of maternal death within 6 weeks, or 42 days, of childbirth. These models include social, economic, and physiological covariates and aim to investigate various influences on maternal mortality. 

Variables such as age of mother, parity, occurrence of multiple births, sex of the newborn child, number of previous child deaths, interval since previous birth, and broader factors like crude death rates, area of residence, seasonality, and period were considered. The model also controlled for the effects of several physiological and bio-demographic factors identified in previous research and aimed at understanding the broader socio-economic influences affecting maternal health outcomes in historical populations.
Parity.
The number of previous births is an important determinant of maternal mortality (Fedrick and Adelstein 1973; DaVanzo et al. 2004, 2008). Most studies show that the risk of maternal death is high at parity 1 (Andersson et al. 2000), decreases from parity 2 to parity 4, and then rises again (Knodel 1988; Hammel and Gullickson 2005). First births may be associated with an increased risk of obstetric hemorrhage and obstructed labour (Rush 2000). In order to verify the possible existence of the J-shaped relation, 'parity' was designated as a categorical variable, the categories being coded '1', '2-4', '5-7', and '8+' births.

Multiple births.
There is empirical evidence from both less developed countries (Conde-Agudelo et al. 2000) and developed countries (Senat et al. 1998) that being pregnant with twins or a higher number of foetuses significantly increases the risk of morbidity and mortality for a mother. Given the strong association between this variable and maternal mortality, our models included a dummy variable for a multiple birth.

Sex of newborn child.
Sex differences in length and weight at birth are common (Crawford et al. 1987) and larger, male newborns are expected to be associated with a higher maternal mortality risk. A specific dummy variable for the sex of the child was therefore included in the model.

Number of previous child deaths.
The number of child deaths a mother has suffered reflects her overall health status and her personal, family, and environmental circumstances (DaVanzo et al. 2004, 2008). Evidence from historical studies documents the higher risk of death faced by pregnant women who have experienced the death of a previous child or children (Andersson et al. 2000). A discrete variable, Number of previous child deaths, was included in the set of models relating to mothers who had borne more than one child, to account for the number of child deaths a mother had experienced before her current pregnancy.

Interval since previous birth.
Short birth intervals negatively impact maternal mortality risks, as found in some historical studies (Hammel and Gullickson 2004, 2005), and a study in Peru among 456,889 women showed that inter-pregnancy intervals of less than 6 months were significantly associated with poorer maternal health and higher mortality (Conde-Agudelo and Belizán 2000). A categorical variable for the length of time from the preceding birth, Interval since previous birth, was calculated with the categories: 'up to 18 months', 'between 19 and 30 months', and 'above 30 months'. Because first births have no preceding birth interval, this covariate was included in a set of models for parities greater than one.

Other variables in the models control for macro-scale influences on the risks of maternal mortality: Crude death rate, Area of residence, Seasonality, and Period.

Crude death rate.
Annual crude death rates (CDRs) were estimated for the six study villages to control for community-level mortality levels. The CDRs were calculated by dividing the number of deaths occurring in the villages by the average population in those villages in a given year.

Area of residence.
Prolonged lactation in northern-central Germany and shorter durations in the southern part have differential effects on maternal weight (Kintner 1985; Knodel 1988). A dummy variable in the models, Area of residence, identifies whether a birth occurred in northern or southern villages, serving as a proxy for the type of breastfeeding behaviour a mother is likely to have adopted.

Seasonality.
Seasonal weather and meteorological conditions affect pregnant and newly delivered women through their influence on seasonal illnesses and access to nutritious food. A four-category variable, Seasonality, was included in the models to control for seasonal variation.

Period.
Developments in midwifery may have influenced maternal mortality rates from the eighteenth century onwards. A five-category, temporal variable, Period, was included to assess non-linear period effects. The categories were the periods 1766-74, 1775-99, 1800-24, 1825-49, and 1850-63.

Socio-economic and Rural status affect maternal mortality risks. Socio-economic status was based on a scheme comprising six categories, from higher managers and professionals to those with no occupation. Rural status distinguished between farm and non-farm workers to reveal differential impacts of economic conditions related to agriculture.

A final variable, the fluctuation in rye prices, was included to consider the nutritional crises' impact on maternal health, with different indices calculated for three areas of Germany where the study villages were located. Both current prices and prices lagged by one year were included to assess the effects of economic stress on mortality.

To assess differential short-term price effects by social class, separate interaction models were estimated. It was expected that farm workers and their wives would be more protected from market fluctuations than other socio-economic groups.
In accordance with HISCLASS, two different categorical covariates were coded and used in the models. The first covariate, Socio-economic status, was based on a simplified scheme comprising six categories: (i) higher and lower managers, professionals, clerical, and sales workers; (ii) foremen and skilled workers; (iii) farmers; (iv) lower skilled workers; (v) unskilled workers; and (vi) those with no occupation, including those cases where an occupation could not be classified or was unknown.

This covariate was developed to distinguish those working in agriculture from other workers. Farmers, lower skilled, and unskilled farm workers were aggregated into a single category, 'farm workers', while another single category 'non-farm workers' was used to group lower skilled and unskilled workers in other activities, skilled workers, foremen, managers, professionals, clerical, and sales workers. The distinction between the two groups helped to reveal the differential impact of price changes on the wives of farm workers and the wives of men not directly involved in agriculture. It was expected that the farm workers, and their wives, would be better protected against the risks of ill-health and mortality following a bad harvest and during times of higher grain prices, since they would have greater access to food stored on the farms.

A measure of fluctuations in rye prices was included in the models as a final variable. Rye was the grain most commonly used to make bread in Germany during the study period, whereas wheat was mainly consumed by the upper classes as a luxury food. Rye was a basic component of pre-industrial diets and German laborers spent a significant proportion of their wages buying it. Rye cultivation represented a substantial share of German agricultural production.

To consider the impact of periodic crises in nutrition on the health status of parturient mothers, a price index for rye was constructed using a method similar to that used in a previous analysis of data from the same sample of villages. The effect of short-term fluctuations in prices was then measured by their deviation from a medium-term trend. The index deviation was calculated using the Hodrick-Prescott filter with a smoothing parameter of 6.25. This filter was preferable for considering deviations from what could be considered 'normal' years.

To represent each of the three areas of Germany where the study villages were located, three different indices were calculated by incorporating rye prices from nearby markets. Both current prices, 'Rye price (t)', and prices lagged by 1 year, 'Rye price (t-1)', were included in the model, since it was expected that short-term economic stress would not only affect mortality immediately but also one or more years later.

The calculated residuals were divided by 10, hence the coefficients in the estimated models should be interpreted as the effect on maternal mortality risk of a ten-unit deviation in the rye price index from the normal level.

Separate interaction models were estimated to assess differential short-term price effects by social class. It was expected that farmers, as grain producers, and their wives would be shown to have been more protected from market fluctuations than those in other socio-economic categories. Conversely, laborers who needed to purchase grain were expected to have been more adversely affected by high prices than higher status groups, who would have had access to greater resources.

The results for two different models were as follows: Model 1, a basic model including only socio-economic status and prices; and Model 2, a full model including all the control covariates drawn from both the biodemographic and macro-level variables.

Model 1 shows that the wives of unskilled workers and men without a recognized occupation register a higher risk of maternal death than the wives of farmers, who form the reference category. It is interesting to note that the risk by socio-economic group is U-shaped: the risks are highest for the wives of lower skilled and unskilled workers, decrease amongst the wives of skilled workers and farmers, and then rise again amongst the wives of managers, professionals, and men in clerical and sales occupations.

According to Model 1, the relative risk increases significantly 1 year after a price rise. The full model, Model 2, indicates that biodemographic effects on maternal mortality were stronger than socio-economic determinants in both their magnitude and significance. Multiple births were extremely dangerous, with 3 times the risk of death for the mother relative to a single birth; a result which was statistically highly significant.

The timing of socio-economic and price effects on women’s risk of maternal mortality can be observed from hazard estimates. The hazard reaches its peak in the week after a woman has given birth, during which maternal deaths are primarily attributable to direct obstetric causes such as hemorrhage, eclampsia, obstructed labor, embolism, and puerperal infections.
The wives of farmers, who form the reference category, are central to understanding how socio-economic groups correlate with risk, exhibiting a U-shaped risk curve: highest for the wives of lower skilled and unskilled workers, decreasing amongst the wives of skilled workers and farmers, and rising again amongst the wives of managers, professionals, and men in clerical and sales occupations. 

The effects of short-term nutritional crises are also noteworthy, with significant relative risk increases seen 1 year after a price rise. The full model, Model 2, demonstrates that bio-demographic effects on maternal mortality were stronger than socio-economic determinants in both their magnitude and significance. Multiple births were extremely dangerous, leading to triple the risk of death for the mother relative to a single birth; this result was statistically highly significant. The maternal mortality risk was highest for parity 1 births, being twice that for parity 2-4 births. There is a J-shaped effect for maternal age, with the relative risk for mothers aged less than 20 years being 1.8 times that of women aged 20-24, decreasing to just 0.6 for ages 25-29, and then rising significantly to 2.3 for women aged over 40.

The variable controlling for crude death rate (CDR) registers a significant positive effect. Seasonality showed no significant effect, although lower risks of maternal mortality were observed in summer than in spring. Over time, the model evidences a decline in maternal mortality at the end of the eighteenth century, with subsequent periods reflecting increasing risks of dying from childbirth, though these increases are not statistically significant. Random effects reveal that the shared frailty of mothers within sibling clusters explains a limited proportion of the total variance.

Observations about the timing of socio-economic and price effects on women’s risk of maternal mortality show that socio-economic differences are most pronounced on the day of delivery; wives of unskilled workers and those with non-occupational husbands are at quantifiably higher risks. More than 2 weeks post-delivery (15-42 days), no socio-economic effects are found, but the lagged price effect shows a significant 18 percent increase in risk.

The regression analysis revealed that non-farm workers' wives experience a 31 percent higher risk of maternal mortality following a price rise compared to their agricultural counterparts. This data suggest that economic crises impact maternal mortality rates more significantly among non-agricultural families.
Non-farm workers register a significantly higher risk of maternal mortality amongst their wives than do their agricultural counterparts. In fact, in the year following a rise in prices, their risk of maternal mortality is 31 percent higher than that of farmers and farm workers. These results indicate that following an economic crisis, maternal mortality varies significantly between the wives of men employed in agriculture and the wives of men who are not.

A specific set of models was designed to take into account the expectation that the risk of dying varied at different parities. Logistic regression analysis of the risk of a mother dying within 42 days of delivery showed the interaction between Rural status and Rye price in six German villages from 1766 to 1863. Results from various models indicated interactions between rural status and changes in rye prices at different times before or after grain harvests influencing maternal risk. Parameters such as age of mother, parity, multiple births, sex of the newborn child, crude death rate, seasonality, and period were also controlled in these models.

Additional models controlled for the number of previous child deaths, as well as for maternal depletion covariates such as interval since previous birth and area of residence, which acted as a proxy for breastfeeding practices. Amongst women in the ‘Parity 2-4’ category, the risk of maternal mortality was much reduced in the two longer categories of interval since previous birth, those who had a previous birth interval of ‘19-30 months’ or ‘more than 30 months’, compared to those whose previous birth interval was ‘less than 18 months’.

Discussion:

The study assessed the determinants of maternal mortality in a sample of pre-demographic transition German villages. The findings indicate that rural farm workers experienced lower maternal mortality than other socio-economic groups when a poor harvest caused grain prices to rise, reducing the amount of grain available for consumption. The subsequent nutritional stress and the implications for the health of the population appear to have been most keenly experienced by workers not directly employed in agriculture. These findings lend support to those advocating for the provision of nutritional supplements to pregnant women in less developed countries and suggest that such programs should target urban dwellers in particular.

Some bio-demographic variables were strongly associated with maternal death. The risk was highest amongst those experiencing their first birth and decreased for women at parities 2, 3, or 4. It increased significantly at higher parities and ages, indicating that childbirth posed a greater risk for older mothers. Signs of maternal depletion were supported by the lower relative risk found for longer categories of interval since the previous birth for those at parities between 2 and 4. However, at ‘Parity 5 and above,’ the relative risk for previous-birth-interval categories was not significant and in an unexpected direction.

The effect of short-term increases in rye prices on maternal mortality became evident a year after the prices rose, indicating a delayed response consistent with previous findings on the impact of economic crises on health in pre-industrial Europe. Further research is needed to replicate these findings in different historical populations.
The sample was not fully representative of that area. East Friesland in northern Germany, where breastfeeding was ‘fairly prolonged’ (Knodel 1988, p. 542), generally presents higher maternal mortality rates. However, this is not the case for Middels, which is situated in East Friesland but registered lower mortality rates. As Knodel observed, the lower rate of Middels is not ‘typical for East Friesland’ and it could be due to some ‘statistical fluctuations’ or some under-reporting of mortality which has affected the estimates. It is also possible that breastfeeding protected mothers by lengthening birth intervals and consequently decreasing maternal depletion. A recent study on early twentieth-century Germany found that breastfeeding practices positively affected the height of men in the military (Haines and Kintner 2008). It is theoretically possible, therefore, that women who were breastfed in their infancy may also have been taller and, as a consequence, less exposed to the risk of obstructed labour.

The effect of a short-term increase in rye prices emerges a year after the prices rose and has a greater and more significant impact on the risk of a maternal death occurring between 15 and 42 days after delivery. This delayed response is consistent with previous findings on the response of mortality to short-term crises in pre-industrial Europe. As several studies on overall mortality have shown, the effect of grain-price rises was often delayed because it took time for nutritional deprivation to affect human health severely. The majority of deaths were not a direct consequence of starvation but were due mainly to the populations’ weakened immune systems, which meant that they were unable to ward off infectious diseases. Since infections were one of the main causes of maternal deaths in the later neo-natal period, this explanation could be extended to maternal mortality, given that severe nutritional stress could have further reduced mothers’ immunity to infection significantly.

The significant effect of the lagged rye price variable on multiparous women is consistent with this explanation since the mothers’ immunity could have been lowered by the combined effects of malnutrition and maternal depletion; nutritional stress would have had much more severe consequences for a mother whose body was already depleted through repeated childbirth and whose immune system was not working effectively.

We also assessed the differential impact of economic crises on those who worked on farms and those who did not. As expected, farmers and farm workers did not experience an increase in maternal mortality risk after a rise in rye prices, presumably because a bad harvest did not necessarily lead to worsening living standards for those working in agriculture. Previous historical studies of pre-industrial Europe have shown that poor harvests often led to higher grain prices, which benefited those producing grain. Farm workers in farming areas appear to have benefited from the same risk-reducing factors as farmers during bad economic times.

Bad harvests and high grain prices forced urban workers, as grain consumers, to spend a higher proportion of their income on this essential foodstuff, leading to a fall in the demand for other products and services. As a result, urban markets and trade would have stagnated, depressing wages and salaries further. Because skilled workers such as shoemakers and tailors, and their assistants, suffered a decline in the demand for their products, they would have been particularly vulnerable to food shortages during periods of high grain prices.

Being the wife of a farmer appears to have offered a better chance of survival for parturient women. One explanation for this could lie in the type of maternal assistance available during childbirth. In the first, controversial phases of the medicalization of childbirth, rural midwives often provided less lethal assistance than urban male physicians. Studies in less developed countries and in historical populations have shown clearly that expert midwives could reduce risks of maternal death. Physiological explanations for better maternal survival in farming areas are also possible. In the pre-industrial era, self-sufficient farms were the source of nutritious food, which gave farmers’ wives a higher level of physiological capital. This could, in turn, have offered them sufficient protection from maternal depletion and the other risks of pregnancy to make a difference to their survival chances during famine and bad economic times. In addition, better nutritional status over a lifetime could also have improved height and stature in adulthood, and reduced the risks of obstructed labor amongst better-fed women.
De Brouwere, Vincent, René Tonglet, and Wim Van Lerberghe. 1998. Strategies for reducing maternal mortality in developing countries: what can we learn from the history of the industrialized West?, Tropical Medicine and International Health 3(10): 771-782.

Dewey, Kathryn G., Roberta J. Cohen, Kenneth H. Brown, and Leonardo Landa Rivera. 2001. Effects of exclusive breastfeeding for four versus six months on maternal nutritional status and infant motor development: results of two randomized trials in Honduras, The Journal of Nutrition 131(2): 262-267.

Dribe, Martin and Francesco Scalone. 2010. Detecting deliberate fertility control in pre-transitional populations: evidence from six German villages, 1766-1863, European Journal of Population 26(4): 411-434.

Fedrick, Jean and Philippa Adelstein. 1973. Influence of pregnancy spacing on outcome of pregnancy, British Medical Journal 4(5895): 753-756.

Fisman, D. N. 2007. Seasonality of infectious diseases, Annual Review of Public Health 28(1): 127-143.

Floud, Roderick, Robert W. Fogel, Bernard Harris, and Sok Chul Hong. 2011. The Changing Body: Health, Nutrition, and Human Development in the Western World since 1700. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Fogel, Robert W. 2003. Secular trends in physiological capital. Implications for equity in health care. Working Paper No. 9771, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Franco, A., J. Cortes, J. Alvarez, and J. C. Diz. 1996. The development of blood transfusion: the contributions of Norman Bethune in the Spanish Civil War (1936-1939), Canadian Journal of Anesthesia 43(10): 1076-1078.

Franco, A. and J. C. Diz. 2000. Wars stimulated the development of anaesthesia, Current Anaesthesia & Critical Care 11(3): 137-140.

Friedmann, Harriet. 1978. World market, state, and family farm: social bases of household production in the era of wage labor, Comparative Studies in Society and History 20(4): 545-586.

Galloway, Patrick R. 1988. Basic patterns in annual variations in fertility, nuptiality, mortality, and prices in pre-industrial Europe, Population Studies 42(2): 275-303.

Green, H. N., D. Pindar, G. Davis, and E. Mellanby. 1931. Diet as a prophylactic agent against puerperal sepsis with special reference to vitamin A as an anti-infective agent, British Medical Journal 2(3691): 595-598.

Hagen, W. 1986. Working for the Junker: the standard of living of manorial laborers in Brandenburg, 1584-1810, The Journal of Modern History 58(1): 143-158.

Haines, M. R. and Hallie J. Kintner. 2008. Can breastfeeding help you in later life? Evidence from German military heights in the early 20th century, Economics & Human Biology 6(3): 420-430.

Hammel, E. A. and A. Gullickson. 2004. Kinship structures and survival: maternal mortality on the Croatian-Bosnian border 1750-1898, Population Studies 58(2): 145-159.

Hammel, E. A. and Aaron Gullickson. 2005. Maternal mortality as an indicator of the standard of living in eighteenth and nineteenth century Slavonia, in Robert C. Allen, Tommy Bengtsson, and Martin Dribe (eds.), Living Standards in the Past: New Perspectives on Well-Being in Asia and Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 277-306.

Hodrick, Robert J. and Edward C. Prescott. 1997. Post-war U.S. business cycles: an empirical investigation, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 29(1): 1-16.

Ho¨gberg, Ulf. 1985. Maternal Mortality in Sweden, Medical Dissertations, New Series No. 156. Umeå: Umeå University.

Ho¨gberg, U. and S. Wall. 1986. Age and parity as determinants of maternal mortality—impact of their shifting distribution among parturients in Sweden from 1781 to 1980, Bulletin of the World Health Organization 64(1): 85-91.

Ho¨gberg, Ulf. 2004. The decline in maternal mortality in Sweden: the role of community midwifery, American Journal of Public Health 94(8): 1312-1320.

Jacks, David S. 2004. Market integration in the North and Baltic seas, 1500-1800, Journal of European Economic History 33(3): 285-329.

Jacks, David S. 2005. Intra- and international commodity market integration in the Atlantic economy, 1800-1913, Explorations in Economic History 42(3): 381-413.

Jelliffe, D. B. and I. Maddocks. 1964. Notes on ecologic malnutrition in the New Guinea Highlands, Clinical Pediatrics 3(7): 432-438.

Khan, K. S., D. Wojdyla, L. Say, A. M. Gulmezoglu, and P. F. Van Look. 2006. WHO analysis of causes of maternal death: a systematic review, The Lancet 367(9516): 1066-1074.

Kintner, Hallie J. 1985. Trends and regional differences in breastfeeding in Germany from 1871 to 1937, Journal of Family History 10(2): 163-182.

Kippen, Rebecca. 2005. Counting maternal deaths in the nineteenth century: the case of Tasmania, Historical Methods 38(1): 14-25.

Knodel, John E. 1988. Demographic Behavior in the Past. A Study of Fourteen German Village Populations in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Koblinsky, Marjorie A. (ed.). 2003. Reducing Maternal Mortality: Learning from Bolivia, China, Egypt, Honduras, Indonesia, Jamaica, and Zimbabwe. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

Komlos, John (ed.). 1994. Stature, Living Standards, and Economic Development: Essays in Anthropometric History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Konje, Justin C. and Oladapo A. Ladipo. 2000. Nutrition and obstructed labor, The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 72(1) (Suppl.): 291-297.

Lee, Robert W. 1981. Family and modernization: the reasons for family and social change in nineteenth-century Bavaria, in Richard J. Evans and W. R. Lee (eds.), The German Family. London: Croom Helm, pp. 84-119.

Lee, Ronald. 1989. Short-term variation: vital rates, prices, and weather, in Edward A. Wrigley and Roger S. Schofield (eds.), The Population History of England, 1541-1871. A Reconstruction. London: Edward Arnold, pp. 356-401.

Li, X. F., J. A. Fortney, M. Kotelchuck, and L. H. Glover. 1996. The postpartum period: the key to maternal mortality, International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics 54(1): 1-10.

Livi Bacci, Massimo. 1990. Population and Nutrition: An Essay on European Demographic History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Loudon, Irvine. 1986a. Deaths in childbed from the eighteenth century to 1935, Medical History 30(1): 1-41.

Loudon, Irvine. 1986b. Obstetric care, social class, and maternal mortality, British Medical Journal 293(6547): 606-608.

Loudon, Irvine. 1987. Puerperal fever, the streptococcus, and the sulphonamides, 1911-1945, British Medical Journal 295(6596): 485-490.

Loudon, Irvine. 1992a. Death in Childbirth: An International Study of Maternal Care and Maternal Mortality, 1800-1950. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Loudon, Irvine. 1992b. The transformation of maternal mortality, British Medical Journal 305(6868): 1557-1560.

Loudon, Irvine. 2000. Maternal mortality in the past and its relevance to developing countries today, The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 72(1) (Suppl.): 241-246.

Merchant, Kathleen, Reynaldo Martorell, and Jere Haas. 1990. Maternal and fetal responses to the stresses of lactation concurrent with pregnancy and of short recuperative intervals, The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 52(2): 280-288.

Mitchell, B. R. 1975. European Historical Statistics 1750-1970. London: Macmillan.

Neilson, J. P., T. Lavender, S. Quenby, and S. Wray. 2003. Obstructed labour, British Medical Bulletin 67 (1): 191-204.

Ogilvie, W. H. 1945. Some applications of the surgical lessons of war to civil practice, British Medical Journal 1(4400): 619-623.

Persson, Viveka, Anna Winkvist, T. Ninuk, S. Hartini, Ted Greiner, Mohammad Hakimi, and Hans Stenlund. 2001. Variability in nutrient intakes among pregnant women in Indonesia: implications for the design of epidemiological studies using the 24-h recall method, The Journal of Nutrition 131(2): 325-330.

Rajakumar, Kumaravel. 2003. Vitamin D, cod-liver oil, sunlight, and rickets: a historical perspective, Pediatrics 112(2): e132-e135.

Reid, Alice. 2005. The effects of the 1918-1919 influenza pandemic on infant and child health in Derbyshire, Medical History 49(1): 29-54.

Rodriguez, German and Irma Elo. 2003. Intra-class correlation in random-effects models for binary data, The Stata Journal 3(1): 32-46.

Ronsmans, Carine and Oona Campbell. 1998. Short birth intervals don't kill women: evidence from Matlab, Bangladesh, Studies in Family Planning 29(3): 280-290.

Ronsmans, Carine and Wendy J. Graham. 2006. Maternal mortality: who, when, where, and why, The Lancet 368(9542): 1189-1200.

Ronsmans, Carine, Simon Collin, and Véronique Filippi. 2008. Maternal mortality in developing countries, in Richard D. Semba and Martin W. Bloem (eds.), Nutrition and Health in Developing Countries. Totowa: Humana Press.

Rush, David. 2000. Nutrition and maternal mortality in the developing world, The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 72(1) (Suppl.): 212-240.

Schofield, Roger. 1986. Did the mothers really die? Three centuries of maternal mortality in ‘The world we have lost’, in L. Bonfield, R. M. Smith, and K. Wrightson (eds.), The World We Have Gained: Histories of Population and Social Structure. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, pp. 231-260.

Scott, Susan and Christopher J. Duncan. 2002. Demography and Nutrition: Evidence from Historical and Contemporary Populations. Oxford: Blackwell Science.

Scrimshaw, N. S. and J. P. SanGiovanni. 1997. Synergism of nutrition, infection, and immunity: an overview, The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 66(2): 464S-477S.

Senat, M. V., P. Y. Ancel, M. H. Bouvier-Colle, and G. Bréart. 1998. How does multiple pregnancy affect maternal mortality and morbidity?, Clinical Obstetric Gynecology 41(1): 79-83.

Tsuya, Noriko O., Wang Feng, George Alter, James Z. Lee (eds.). 2010. Prudence and Pressure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Tuchman, A. M. 2005. The true assistant to the obstetrician: state regulation and the legal protection of midwives in nineteenth-century Prussia, Social History of Medicine 18(1): 23-38.

Van Leeuwen, Marco H. D., Ineke Maas, and Andrew Miles. 2002. HISCO. Historical International Standard Classification of Occupations. Leuven: Leuven University Press.

Van Leeuwen, Marco H. D. and Ineke Maas. 2011. HISCLASS. A Historical International Social Class Scheme. Leuven: Leuven University Press.

Van Lerberghe, Wim and Vincent De Brouwere. 2001. Of blind alleys and things that have worked: history’s lessons on reducing maternal mortality, in Vincent De Brouwere and Wim Van Lerberghe (eds.), Safe Motherhood Strategies: A Review of the Evidence. Antwerp: ITG Press, pp. 7-33.

Villar, J., M. Merialdi, A. M. Gülmezoglu, E. Abalos, G. Carroli, R. Kulier, and M. J. de Onis. 2003. Nutritional interventions during pregnancy for the prevention or treatment of maternal morbidity and preterm delivery: an overview of randomized controlled trials, The Journal of Nutrition 133(5): 1606-1625.

Villar, J., M. Purwar, M. Merialdi, N. Zavaleta, N. Thi Nhu Ngoc, J. Anthony, A. De Greeff, L. Poston, and A. Shennan. 2009. World Health Organisation multicentre randomised trial of supplementation with vitamins C and E among pregnant women at high risk for pre-eclampsia in populations of low nutritional status from developing countries. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 116(6): 780-788.

Weinberg, Eugene D. 1984. Pregnancy-associated depression of cell-mediated immunity, Clinical Infectious Diseases 6(6): 814-831.

West, Keith P., Joanne Katz, Subarna K. Khatry, Steven C. LeClerq, Elizabeth K. Pradhan, Sharada R. Shrestha, Paul B. Connor, Sanu M. Dali, Parul Christian, Ram P. Pokhrel, Alfred Sommer 1999. Double blind, cluster randomized trial of low dose supplementation with vitamin A or beta carotene on mortality related to pregnancy in Nepal, British Medical Journal 318(7183): 570-575.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2004. Maternal Mortality in 2000: Estimates Developed by WHO, UNICEF, and UNFPA. Geneva: WHO.

Winkvist, Anna, Kathleen M. Rasmussen, and Jean-Pierre Habicht. 1992. A new definition of maternal depletion syndrome, American Journal of Public Health 82(5): 691-694.

Woods, Robert. 2005. The measurement of historical trends in fetal mortality in England and Wales, Population Studies 59(2): 147-162.

Woods, Robert. 2009. Death before Birth: Fetal Health and Mortality in Historical Perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Wrigley, E. A., R. S. Davis, J. E. Oeppen, and R. S. Schofield. 1997. English Population History from Family Reconstitution 1580-1837. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Van Leeuwen, Marco H. D. and Ineke Maas. 2011. HISCLASS. A Historical International Social Class Scheme. Leuven: Leuven University Press.

Van Lerberghe, Wim and Vincent De Brouwere. 2001. Of blind alleys and things that have worked: history’s lessons on reducing maternal mortality, in Vincent De Brouwere and Wim Van Lerberghe (eds.), Safe Motherhood Strategies: A Review of the Evidence. Antwerp: ITG Press, pp. 7-33.

Villar, J., M. Merialdi, A. M. Gülmezoglu, E. Abalos, G. Carroli, R. Kulier, and M. J. de Onis. 2003. Nutritional interventions during pregnancy for the prevention or treatment of maternal morbidity and preterm delivery: an overview of randomized controlled trials, The Journal of Nutrition 133(5): 1606-1625.

Villar, J., M. Purwar, M. Merialdi, N. Zavaleta, N. Thi Nhu Ngoc, J. Anthony, A. De Greeff, L. Poston, and A. Shennan. 2009. World Health Organisation multicentre randomised trial of supplementation with vitamins C and E among pregnant women at high risk for preeclampsia in populations of low nutritional status from developing countries. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 116(6): 780-788.

Weinberg, Eugene D. 1984. Pregnancy-associated depression of cell-mediated immunity, Clinical Infectious Diseases 6(6): 814-831.

West, Keith P., Joanne Katz, Subarna K. Khatry, Steven C. LeClerq, Elizabeth K. Pradhan, Sharada R. Shrestha, Paul B. Connor, Sanu M. Dali, Parul Christian, Ram P. Pokhrel, Alfred Sommer 1999. Double blind, cluster randomized trial of low dose supplementation with vitamin A or beta carotene on mortality related to pregnancy in Nepal, British Medical Journal 318(7183): 570-575.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2004. Maternal Mortality in 2000: Estimates Developed by WHO, UNICEF and UNFPA. Geneva: WHO.

Winkvist, Anna, Kathleen M. Rasmussen, and Jean-Pierre Habicht. 1992. A new definition of maternal depletion syndrome, American Journal of Public Health 82(5): 691-694.

Woods, Robert. 2005. The measurement of historical trends in fetal mortality in England and Wales, Population Studies 59(2): 147-162.

Woods, Robert. 2009. Death before Birth: Fetal Health and Mortality in Historical Perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Wrigley, E. A., R. S. Davis, J. E. Oeppen, and R. S. Schofield. 1997. English Population History from Family Reconstitution 1580-1837. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.