Factors Influencing the Fertility Choices of Child Immigrants in Canada

Alicia Adsera and Ana Ferrer

We analyzed the fertility of women who migrated to Canada before reaching age 19, using the 20 percent sample of the Canadian censuses from 1991 to 2006. Fertility increases with age at immigration, and is particularly high for those immigrating in late adolescence. This pattern prevails regardless of the country of origin, and of whether the mother tongue of the migrants was an official language in Canada. The fertility of those for whom it was an official language is always lower on average than of those for whom it was not, but there does not seem to be a critical age at which the fertility of the former and the latter starts to diverge. Formal education has an effect: the fertility of immigrants who arrived in Canada at any age before adulthood and who were or became college graduates is similar to that of their native peers.

Keywords: fertility; migration; adoption; adaptation; assimilation; age at migration; language; education; Canada

1. Introduction and Background

With rising dependency ratios produced by low fertility in Western OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) countries and the ageing of their baby-boom generations, immigrant flows have become an important factor in sustaining levels of public services and maintaining population growth. These flows have prompted a significant body of research on the fertility of immigrants, in particular on differences in fertility between immigrants and the native-born, and on whether these differences tend to disappear over the medium to long term. This research has been revealing about the socio-economic integration of immigrants, especially women because childbearing decisions are related to education and choices about participation in the labor market. A relatively high fertility rate among first-generation immigrants may hinder the economic success of female immigrants and have an adverse impact on the economic well-being of immigrant families and investments in the education of their children.

Canada, with one of the largest shares of immigrants among Western nations—around 20 percent of the population was born abroad—is an interesting case for the study of immigrant fertility. Unlike other major destination countries, the Canadian Government has developed policies to attract educated immigrants and reward knowledge of local languages (English and French). Immigrants to Canada are admitted in three main categories—‘skilled’, ‘family’, and ‘refugee’—and skilled immigrants currently account for around 60 percent of all new admissions. This policy results in an immigrant profile that is more educated and closer to that of native members of the host country than in other countries, such as the USA, and is likely to have important consequences for the assimilation of immigrants.

The fertility decisions of immigrants are ultimately determined by the opportunities and costs they encounter in their interaction with Canadians, and the circumstances they face in Canada. Immigrant women facing better labor market prospects in the host country than in their countries of origin may decide to reduce or postpone their fertility in order to work. The costs of using childcare services in the host country (where there may be no relatives to provide informal care) is another incentive to work rather than to have another child, and to devote more resources to the rearing of each child rather than to increase their number.

Assimilation and the Role of Age at Migration

Unlike previous research, which focused primarily on the fertility outcomes of adult migrants, the study presented here analyzed the fertility of immigrant women who arrived in Canada before the age of 19, and compared it with that of the native-born. We assumed that for individuals who migrate as children, the link between migration and subsequent fertility would be less directly affected by any short-term disruptive effects of the migration experience and less biased by selection. Child immigrants are likely to arrive with their parents and, as a result, their ‘decision’ to migrate is independent of other variables affecting fertility. Thus, by studying child migrants, we were able to focus on the assimilation process in the receiving country, and the role that age at migration played in it. Another reason for focusing on women who migrate as children and their age at immigration was the possibility that there might be critical ages at which individuals learn a particular behavior or skill, such as the local language, that are crucial for future social and economic outcomes.

Fluency in the language of the destination country has long been recognized as playing a key role in the immigrant’s subsequent life course and degree of assimilation. In the case of fertility, having a mother tongue that is not an official language may affect the ability of the child migrant to form her fertility preferences by internalizing the local cultural cues from school and peers. Previous analyses have found greater English fluency to be associated with lower fertility in the USA. Moreover, it is well documented that fluency in the language of the destination country decreases with age at immigration, among other factors, and should therefore be greater for those migrants who arrive as children. In their paper, Bleakley and Chin show that the outcomes for immigrants from non-English-speaking countries to the USA consistently differ from those of other migrants only for those older than the ‘critical ages’ of 8-9 years on arrival. In the case of fertility, there may be an additional mechanism by which age at arrival is influential if cultural norms of reproductive behavior adopted at a young age continue to influence fertility decisions into adulthood.
The costs of using childcare services in the host country, where there may be no relatives to provide informal care, is another incentive to work rather than to have another child (see Carter 2000 for Mexicans in the USA), and to devote more resources to the rearing of each child rather than to increase their number (Becker 1981). The analysis of fertility differences between the immigrants and the native-born requires an understanding of the forces that shape the fertility choices of immigrants. In their seminal paper on this subject, Goldstein and Goldstein (1981) identify three important factors that explain the fertility behavior of migrants: selection, disruption, and adaptation. The selection hypothesis posits that individuals who migrate from their country of origin differ systematically from those who do not migrate, and this selectivity may explain their subsequent fertility patterns (Kahn 1988; Forste and Tienda 1996; Sobotka 2008). The second factor, disruption, refers to the actual and expected short-term disruption of fertility at the time of migration (Goldstein and Goldstein 1981; Ram and George 1990; Blau 1992; Stephen and Bean 1992; Kahn 1994; Ng and Nault 1997; Toulemon 2004). Finally, the adaptation hypothesis posits that, as migrants settle in their new environment, their fertility norms and expectations begin to resemble those of the native population (Goldstein and Goldstein 1981; Stephen and Bean 1992; Alba and Nee 1997).

Because the effects of the three factors proposed by the Goldsteins may coexist (or follow each other in quick succession), the separate role of each can be difficult to isolate and assess. Theoretically, it might be possible to observe an initial fall in fertility because of disruption at the time of immigration, followed by a subsequent rise in fertility, and then a gradual convergence with the fertility levels of the host country as immigrants adopt local norms. Hypotheses about the effects of each of the factors have been tested, but none has been conclusively accepted or rejected (Kulu 2005).

Assimilation and the role of age at migration

Unlike previous research, which focused primarily on the fertility outcomes of adult migrants, the study presented here analyzed the fertility of immigrant women who arrived in Canada before the age of 19, and compared it with that of the native-born. The data used were from the four Canadian censuses (20 percent sample) of 1991, 1996, 2001, and 2006. We assumed that for individuals who migrate as children, the link between migration and subsequent fertility would be less directly affected by any short-term, disruptive effects of the migration experience and less biased by selection. Child immigrants are likely to arrive with their parents and, as a result, their ‘decision’ to migrate is independent of other variables affecting fertility. Thus, by studying child migrants, we were able to focus on the assimilation process in the receiving country, and the role that age at migration played in it. Related literature on economics has also recognized age at immigration as a decisive factor in explaining differentials in the process of immigrant assimilation measured by various socio-economic characteristics (Chiswick 1991; Picot and Sweetman 2005; Ferrer et al. 2006; Picot et al. 2007).

Another reason for focusing on women who migrate as children and their age at immigration was the possibility that there might be critical ages at which individuals learn a particular behavior or skill, such as the local language, that are crucial for future social and economic outcomes (Schaafsma and Sweetman 2001; Bleakley and Chin 2010). Fluency in the language of the destination country has long been recognized as playing a key role in the immigrant’s subsequent life course and degree of assimilation (see, e.g., Kossoudji 1988; Dustmann 1994; Chiswick and Miller 2001, 2004; Schaafsma and Sweetman 2001; Dustmann and van Soest 2002; Bleakley and Chin 2004). Studies by Leslie and Lindley (2001) and Dustmann and Fabbri (2003), for example, find that lack of fluency in English has a detrimental effect on the employment and earnings of men and women in ethnic minorities in Britain. In the case of fertility, having a mother tongue that is not an official language may affect the ability of the child migrant to form her fertility preferences by internalizing the local cultural cues from school and peers. Previous analyses have found greater English fluency to be associated with lower fertility in the USA (Sorenson 1988; Swicegood et al. 1988; Bleakley and Chin 2010). Moreover, it is well documented that fluency in the language of the destination country decreases with age at immigration, among other factors (Chiswick 1991; Stevens 1992, 1999; Espenshade and Fu 1997; Espinosa and Massey 1997; Akresh 2007), and should therefore be greater for those migrants who arrive as children. In their paper, Bleakley and Chin (2010) show that the outcomes for immigrants from non-English-speaking countries to the USA consistently differ from those of other migrants only for those older than the ‘critical ages’ of 8-9 years on arrival. In the case of fertility, there may be an additional mechanism by which age at arrival is influential if cultural norms of reproductive behavior adopted at a particular age (for instance, at the onset of puberty) are resistant to change later on.
Data and empirical approach

The study presented in this paper focused on the total number of children born to women in Canada aged 16-45, by their migration status and a set of characteristics treated as independent variables. Because the dependent variable is an integer variable, we estimated it using a Poisson model of the following form:
ln E(Fi) = Σ (bj Aji) + a Xi
where Fi is the fertility measure of woman i; Aji is a set of indicator variables, one for each age at immigration, j, from under age 1 to age 18, which constitutes the main focus of our research, as well as a separate indicator for those arriving after age 18; X is a vector of demographic variables (that varies from model to model, according to specification). Canadian-born women were taken as the reference group. The estimated Poisson models always included a rural indicator and a set of dummy variables for the province of residence, and indicators for the 5-year age groups of the women to allow for differences in fertility over the life cycle. The model also included 5-year group indicators for birth cohorts to account for the fact that women born at different times might have different attitudes towards fertility and face different constraints on access to family planning, government services, and so on. Finally, indicators distinguishing the different census years were also added to account for possible survey-year effects. Since the census sample included respondents at different ages, we controlled for their varying exposure time to fertility (defined as age minus 15 years) in the models. We decided not to include income measures because it was not realistic to regard them as exogenous from fertility choices, and also because longitudinal information on income before births was not available. Including education in the analysis (see below) to some extent provided a control for potential income. Although we do not report estimates for all control variables in the paper, they show consistent results across all the model runs and are available on request.

The first set of Poisson models included the following elements: first, a specification with the basic covariates in equation (1); second, a specification that adds indicators for highest educational attainment (below high school, high school, non-university post-secondary education, and university education); and finally, a specification that adds region of birth. The inclusion of these indicators produced estimates of the effect of age at immigration on fertility that were net of educational or regional effects. However, the underlying assumption was that education and region of birth have a uniform effect on the fertility of immigrants, regardless of their age at immigration.

Next, to study whether the fertility-change profile varied across regions of origin, a set of interactions between indicators of age at immigration and place of birth was added to the basic model.

The last two models in the study explored whether the two variables discussed in the previous section, language fluency and schooling, played a mediating role in the process of adopting the host country’s fertility patterns. The Canadian census asks whether the respondent speaks one of the official languages, but does not ask about fluency. Because the ability to speak an official language is one of the criteria the Canadian Government uses to select immigrants, the variable is not very informative. As a result, the Canadian immigration literature has typically relied on mother tongue, the language that individuals first understood and could still understand, as a proxy for fluency. The advantage of mother tongue compared with self-reported fluency is that it is a fairly exogenous variable. Further, the ‘distance’ between the mother tongue and the official language of the destination country is generally related to labour market and education outcomes, as well as to migration flows. We created the indicator ‘official mother tongue’ (OMT) to indicate whether a woman’s mother tongue was the same as, or different from, the prevalent official language in her province of residence. Although Canada recognizes two official languages, French is used mostly in Quebec and English elsewhere. Hence, a set of interaction terms between the OMT indicator and ages at immigration was added to the models to estimate the fertility profiles of immigrants with and without an OMT and compare them with the fertility of the Canadian-born. The last model added an interaction term between an indicator of university degree and age at immigration. This model produced estimates of the fertility profiles by age at migration of immigrants with and without university education, and compared them with similarly educated Canadian-born women.

Data

The data used in the study were obtained from the confidential files of the Canadian Census of Population (20 percent sample) for the years 1991, 1996, 2001, and 2006. Confidential census data provide large samples that allow multiple analyses, yielding robust estimates. In addition, they include more detailed information on individuals, as well as a richer categorization of relationships between household members than in generally available data. With such information, we were able to compute the number of children of each woman living in the household. For each census year, we selected all non-aboriginal women aged between 16 and 45, and extracted the following information: education; marital status; number of live-born children (available in the 1991 Census); number of children living in the household; province of residence; and immigrant status. In addition, for immigrant women we collected their year of immigration, age at immigration, and country of birth. We grouped individuals by country of birth into 20 relatively homogenous regions (for a detailed listing, see Adsera and Ferrer 2011). ‘Age at immigration’ refers to the age at which the respondent became a permanent resident. Most child immigrants enter the country as permanent residents, so this should not have affected our sample greatly. To reduce computing time, for each census year we selected all immigrant women and a 20 percent random sample of women born in Canada, and weighted observations accordingly. Data from the four censuses were then pooled, giving approximately 1.8 million observations.

In general, in developed countries, vital statistics are the most accurate source of information on fertility. However, since they contain little additional information about the individual and household, they cannot be used for an in-depth analysis of fertility behavior. An alternative method is to estimate fertility indirectly from survey information such as census samples, which typically report the number of children living in the household. The method, known as the ‘own child’ method, relies on the fact that the vast majority of young children live with their mother. Since the date of birth of both mother and children is known, it is possible to reconstruct each woman’s fertility history. Be´langer and Gilbert (2003) showed that when the difference between the fertility of the immigrants and that of the native-born was estimated by both methods for the period 1996-2001, the results did not differ appreciably; there was a smaller difference with census data for women younger than 30, and a larger difference for those aged over 30. We therefore used the number of children living in the household as our measure of fertility, the dependent variable in our models.

To the extent that some children may not have been living with their mothers, our dependent variable was underestimated. To minimize this problem, we restricted our sample to relatively young women (up to 45 years of age), whose children were more likely to be living at home. Nevertheless, several difficulties with the measure remained. First, the census questionnaire asks respondents to include children in joint custody who live most of the time in the household as household members. Therefore, our sample excluded all the children who were living exclusively with their father. Since young children were far more likely to live with their mothers than their fathers, even after marriage disruption, this was not an important factor for our analysis. Second, some of the children of older women may have already left home, which meant that their early childbearing would not have been included in the analysis. This could have had a particularly serious effect if the rates of departure of children from the household in their late adolescence or early adulthood (to attend college far from home, for early marriage or cohabitation, and so on) differed between immigrants and the Canadian-born.

To assess the importance of the potential bias introduced by our dependent variable, we undertook three types of tests for robustness. First, we used the information on the total number of children ever born to a woman, available from the 1991 Census, to re-estimate the models and compare the results with those obtained for the 1991 Census using our fertility measure. Second, we re-ran the models using a restricted sample of women aged up to 40 instead of 45. This reduced the likelihood that some of the children had already left home, but would have missed late childbearing (i.e., occurring between age 40 and 44), which may occur differentially between groups (e.g., according to education, country of origin, etc.). In a relevant study, Vezina and Turcotte (2009), after comparing data from the Canada census and from the General Social Survey, found that there was no appreciable difference in the characteristics (including immigrant status) of women aged from 40 to 44 with a child aged 5 or older, between those with some and those with none of their children living with them. Third, we re-ran the models restricting the children included in our fertility measure to those aged 18 or younger. Differences in the results when using this definition of the dependent variable would have indicated that the bias introduced by the ‘own child’ method was important. However, the overall pattern of the results and the estimated coefficients were found to be robust across these different samples and model runs. These results are available on request.
The results were found to be robust across these different samples and model runs. Descriptive statistics for the Canadian-born and the immigrants are presented in Table 1, which includes data from the 1991, 1996, 2001, and 2006 censuses as well as statistics for 1991 and 2006 separately to indicate changes over the period. Around 50 percent of immigrants arrived in Canada as adults, after the age of upper-secondary schooling, with peak ages of entry between 20 and 30 years. A substantial proportion, about 50 percent in the 1991 Census and 45 percent in the 2006 Census, arrived before adulthood and were the subject of the study. They were increasingly arriving from Asia and Africa, leading to a rising proportion of immigrants with a non-official mother tongue or using a non-official language at home. Canadian immigration policies focused on skill-based selection have led to the attraction of highly educated immigrants—on average, 45 percent of immigrants had post-secondary education as compared to 37 percent of the Canadian-born.

The study used a sample of Canadian-born females and immigrant females for its analysis on immigrant fertility from 1991 to 2006. Descriptive statistics, such as the number of children, age, education, marital status, years since immigration, age at immigration, and country/region of origin, were considered crucial in understanding fertility choices.

The Poisson regressions performed indicated significant differences in fertility behavior due to factors like age at immigration and the level of education. Results were graphically presented as incidence rate ratios (IRRs), indicating immigrant females' fertility rates as a proportion of Canadian-born females' rates. Further analysis included factors like region of birth to account for cultural influences on fertility norms.

Throughout the study, fertility generally increased with age at immigration. Furthermore, the inclusion of the educational attainment in the models slightly flattened the fertility rates profile for late adolescents. Including region of birth indicated significant differences across various ages of arrival compared to the native-born Canadians.

The study concluded that differences in the timing of births among child migrants were unlikely the reason for observed fertility patterns. Additionally, even after considering different origins, the fertility profiles by age at immigration showed significant variation, suggesting diverse adaptations of fertility norms among immigrants.
Fertility level. This third model specification implicitly assumed that the effect of age at immigration was the same for all countries of birth. We consider alternative possibilities below. Holding current age and birth cohort constant, fertility generally increases with age at immigration (lowest line in Figure 1). In the basic model, the fertility rate for women who migrated before age 6 is either somewhat lower than, or indistinguishable from, that of native-born women. The fertility rate for women who migrated to Canada between the ages of 7 and 11 is within a margin of only 3-4 per cent of that of the native-born. This difference increases to about 10 per cent for those who arrived during early adolescence (ages 12-15), and rises sharply from 22 per cent for late adolescents, age 16, to 28 per cent for those who arrived at age 17 and, finally, to 33 per cent for those who arrived at age 18. Adding education to the model changes fertility differences somewhat by slightly flattening the profile of fertility rates by age for arrivals in late adolescence. Once region of birth is included in the model, the estimated relative fertilities at most ages of arrival are significantly different from 1 (the baseline for the native-born). An interesting feature of Figure 1 is that, while there is no evidence of a sharp discontinuity in the fertility rate by age at immigration, there are slight steps at ages that roughly correspond to milestones in the schooling system (elementary school, junior high school, and senior high school). Further, fertility increases more gradually with age at immigration until early adolescence, and then rises at a faster pace during late adolescence. This result does not seem to be driven by a larger probability of intermarriage among those arriving at younger ages. In separate regressions, not shown here, we observe that immigrants in mixed marriages (married to native-born Canadians) showed similar increases in fertility with older age at immigration. The observed peak in fertility for those arriving in late adolescence could also be attributed in part to the phenomenon of ‘child brides’ prevalent in some European countries. However, this factor is unlikely to be important in Canada, which receives few immigrants from cultures favouring arranged marriages and has a more selective immigration policy regime than most European countries (Adsera and Ferrer 2011).

A natural question to ask is whether the observed differences in total fertility by age at immigration are driven in part by differences in the timing of births. Our focus on child migrants ensures that these differences are not the result of the temporary disruption of fertility attributable to the process of immigration itself (Andersson 2004). On the other hand, if child migrants have their children much earlier in life than the Canadian-born, our estimates may portray a higher fertility among immigrants simply because they were closer to completing their childbearing. Ideally, the study would have focused on women who had already completed their fertility. That would not have been possible using census data since, as explained above, the data do not include a complete fertility history of women, and the ‘own child’ method is not suitable for older women. To investigate births to these older women, the full model was re-run with the sample of women restricted to those aged between 35 and 45. The results are very similar to those for the whole sample, with fertility rising with increased age at arrival and peaking for arrivals in late adolescence. This suggests that differences in the timing of births were unlikely to be the reason for the results in Figure 1. Estimates that take into account the region of birth are very similar to those that do not, which suggests that the results are not reflecting variation in age at arrival by country of origin. Nevertheless, in Table 2, the estimated IRRs by region of origin show large differences in fertility levels between groups. The fertility rate for immigrants from Mexico at each arrival age is 40 per cent higher than that of the reference group of US-born migrants. Other immigrant groups with high fertility rates are those from Central America, Africa (except South Africa), the Middle East, and Southern Asia. This implies that their relative fertility for each age at arrival shifts upward in relation to that of US-born migrants and that their fertility-age at migration profile has more exaggerated positive peaks. The reverse holds for Eastern European immigrants and those from elsewhere in Asia. Chinese immigrants exhibit the lowest fertility rate of all groups: it is only 0.73 times that of the US-born.

Leaving aside country-of-birth differences in levels of fertility, does the fertility of each immigrant group show the same profile by age at immigration as that of the average migrant? To analyse whether child immigrants arriving from certain regions acquired the fertility norms of the host country more quickly than others with similar years of exposure, we included in the model a set of dummy variables for the interaction between region of birth and age at immigration. To distinguish distinct periods of exposure to these norms, we categorized age at immigration into five groups corresponding roughly to the different stages in the school system: those immigrating as pre-school children (aged 5 or under at the time of immigration); those immigrating as elementary school children (aged 6-11 at the time of immigration); those immigrating in early adolescence (aged 12-15) who were likely to enter junior high school; those immigrating in late adolescence (aged 16-18) who were still highly likely to receive some form of Canadian schooling; and, finally, those immigrating at ages older than 18. This categorization was intended to avoid putting children entering Canada with different levels of schooling in the same group, as doing so might have affected any interaction effects (Khmelkov and Hallinan 1999). We also grouped countries into broader regions (USA/Europe, Middle East, South Asia, Other Asia and the Pacific, Africa, and South America including Central America) to make the differences more obvious when represented graphically.

The results in Figure 2 reveal that fertility increases with age at immigration, reaching a peak in late adolescence for all regions of origin. The only difference between regions is in the level of fertility. Immigrants from the Middle East display high fertility rates even if they had arrived before age 6 (approximately 7 per cent higher than the native-born), while the fertility rate of those arriving between birth and age 5 is relatively low among Africans and South Asians (around 15 per cent lower than that of the native-born), and even lower for immigrants from the Rest of Asia and the Pacific (around 30 per cent lower). The fertility rates of immigrants from the Middle East and South Asia increase sharply with age at immigration (for these immigrants the fertility of the oldest at arrival is 70 per cent greater than that of the youngest). Immigrants from Africa and the Rest of Asia and the Pacific also show a similar sharp increase in the fertility rate with age at immigration (the fertility of the oldest being 41 and 32 per cent greater than that of the youngest, respectively). The increase is more moderate for American immigrants.

These patterns suggest that the adoption of Canadian fertility norms is a relatively smooth process for the US/Europeans, South Americans and Middle Easterners, and that the younger they arrived in Canada, the more their fertility resembles that of the native-born. Immigrants from Africa and South Asia show a somewhat different pattern: the fertility levels of those arriving very young are significantly lower than those of the Canadian-born, but are larger for immigrants arriving at older ages. For those arriving from the Rest of Asia and the Pacific, fertility is below that of the native-born at all ages of immigration, and particularly so for the youngest ages at arrival, though the fertility of those arriving in their late adolescence just reaches that of the Canadian-born.

It may seem paradoxical to refer to the adoption of Canadian fertility norms for those immigrant groups that have lower fertility than the native-born, but we believe that our findings are partly the result of differences in the age and educational profiles of the different groups. For example, among those who arrived between birth and age 5, the proportion who were still under 25 years of age and so were far from having completed their fertility at the time of the census ranged from around 28 per cent for US/European migrants, to around 55 per cent for Africans and South Americans, and almost two-thirds for those from the ‘Rest of Asia and the Pacific’ and the Middle East. Although the models controlled for age, they may not have accounted completely for the interactions of age and region of birth that might explain these findings. Because age indicators only account for the average effect for all immigrants, it is possible that some groups of immigrants in particular those who arrived before middle-school age from the Rest of Asia and the Pacific, and who were still young differed from the native-born in their preferences for both fertility and schooling. Given the available sample sizes, it was impossible to include a complete set of interactions of age, schooling, and region of origin in a model to investigate such patterns.
However, when we restricted the sample to women aged 35 and older, or to those from the birth cohort 1961-66 most of whose childbearing was known, the expected pattern of adopting local fertility norms was observed, regardless of region of birth. The results show that the fertility of immigrants who arrived between birth and age 5 is relatively similar to that of the native-born (and only slightly below that of those from the Rest of Asia and the Pacific), and exceeds it at older ages at immigration for all groups. Whether today’s young child migrants from these regions will follow the same pattern as the older cohorts remains to be seen. Judging from the behaviour of the older cohorts, it is possible that the younger ones are just delaying fertility to a greater extent than the native-born.

Age at immigration and language fluency using IRRs, Figure 3 presents fertility by age at immigration separately for those with and those without an OMT as well as the fertility of Canadian women with an OMT relative to Canadian women without an OMT. For migrants, the figure displays the IRRs of US immigrants (relative to native-born women without an OMT). The figure shows that the fertility rate of Canadian-born women with an OMT is 5 percent higher than the rate of those without one. This finding is consistent with previous research showing that second-generation immigrants in Canada have lower fertility levels, on average, than both first-generation and third-generation Canadians. Immigrants who do not have an OMT have higher fertility rates than any other group, even if they arrived at very young ages. The fertility of US immigrants with an OMT who migrated before age 5 is similar to that of the Canadian-born. The relative fertility of both those with and those without an OMT increases with age at immigration, although the increase is steeper for the latter (particularly for those who arrived as adolescents). Unlike studies of US immigrants, we do not find a 'critical age' (e.g., middle school) at which the fertility of immigrants who have an OMT starts to diverge sharply from the fertility of those who do not have one. Nevertheless, since there are persistent differences in fertility between these two groups, it seems clear that language fluency, as a proxy for the first language spoken by the immigrant as a child, plays a mediating role (presumably by making it easier for those with an OMT to be sensitive to the influences that lead to the adoption of local fertility norms). The finding applies both to speaking French in Quebec and to speaking English in the rest of Canada. However, the fact that relative fertility increases with the age at immigration, even among those with an OMT, suggests that language fluency is not the main influence on the extent to which the fertility of child immigrants resembles that of the native-born.

Age at immigration and education Figure 4 shows the fertility of immigrants with, and without, a university education relative to that of native-born Canadians without a university education. Immigrants without a university education follow the pattern shown in Figure 1 of increasing fertility with older age at immigration, and their fertility is statistically significantly higher than that of the corresponding native-born, even for those who migrated at very young ages. By contrast, the fertility of immigrants with a university education is fairly independent of their age at immigration, and similar to that of the Canadian-born with a university education, except for a slight increase for those who arrived at age 18. Similar results are obtained for comparisons using college or other forms of post-secondary education. Further, when the model was estimated with three levels of schooling—below high school, high school, and college—differentials in fertility relative to that of the native-born by age at immigration were apparent mainly for those who had not completed secondary education. To check that age factors were not responsible for the results, we re-estimated this model using the 1961-66 birth cohort and also, separately, the sample of women aged over 35, and obtained the same pattern of results. In addition, the profiles of ages at immigration were relatively flat for the university educated, regardless of the region of birth.

These findings suggest that, for child immigrants, their educational achievement and the degree to which they adopt the fertility norms of the native-born are closely associated. However, since these are reduced-form estimates, they fail to take into account the fact that decisions about schooling and fertility may be made jointly, and how norms for these two factors are transmitted inter-generationally. No causal statements can be made since unobserved heterogeneity (for example, in preferences for work and children) may be driving both education and fertility choices.
The study we have described focused on the behavior of immigrant women arriving in Canada before age 19. The fertility of those who migrate before adulthood is unlikely to be affected by disruption around the time of migration or by any association between the timing of migration and family formation that might boost fertility immediately after arrival, as suggested by the family-formation hypothesis. Moreover, a strong selection bias for fertility among child migrants at the individual level is also unlikely. Hence, although we cannot entirely discount the selection hypothesis, the adoption of host-country norms is clearly the most plausible mechanism for this group. Child immigrants have more time than adult immigrants to internalize the host country’s fertility norms, since most of their childhood socialization takes place in the destination country. Of course, selection may still play a role at the household or family level, and the host country’s policy may have an influence at this level. For example, the Canadian immigration system, which awards more points to the highly educated, might have an indirect influence on their offspring’s educational achievement. In addition, parents who value education may be more likely to migrate than others, and they might also choose to move while their children are young enough to benefit from the educational opportunities available in the destination country. 

We hypothesized that the younger immigrants were when they arrived in Canada, the closer would be their fertility patterns to those of the native-born. This hypothesis was confirmed. Our analysis shows that there is indeed a positive relationship between relative fertility and age at immigration, with a steeper increase for those arriving in later adolescence. This association between fertility and age at immigration is similar for different groups of immigrants from different regions of the world, although their actual fertility levels vary.

On the other hand, in contrast to our expectations, very young immigrants from Asia and Africa have significantly lower fertility than the Canadian-born and, in the case of those from the Rest of Asia and the Pacific, only those who arrive during their late adolescence are likely to reach Canadian-born levels of fertility. However, when we examined the fertility patterns of older women (whose childbearing was almost complete) from those regions, the expected pattern—adoption of local fertility norms—was apparent, regardless of the region of birth. It appears that recent immigrants from these areas who arrived at very young ages might be following a very different pattern, with higher levels of schooling and later childbearing than the similarly aged native-born.

In exploring plausible determinants of assimilation, we assessed the influence of language fluency and educational attainment. Unlike studies on other immigrant outcomes, we do not find a sharp discontinuity in immigrant fertility behavior relative to the native-born among migrants who arrive at ages younger than the age of entry into middle school and whose mother tongue is different from that of the destination country, and among those who arrive later. Their relative fertility increases with age at arrival. Moreover, the fertility of immigrants with an other mother tongue (OMT) also diverges from that of the native-born increasingly with older age at immigration, though it remains lower than that of immigrants without an OMT for all ages of arrival.

When child immigrants are grouped by educational level, increasing fertility with older age at arrival is apparent only among less educated immigrants. The fertility of university-educated young immigrants is similar to that of the native-born, regardless of their age at arrival and region of birth. The findings are robust to variation in a number of possible confounding factors, including language spoken at home, intermarriage, and language of the spouse. 

Some questions about the mechanisms by which fertility norms are acquired remain unanswered. We find evidence that educational level is more closely associated than language fluency with the adoption of local fertility norms. This may be the result of variability in factors that we have not taken into account and that may determine both education and fertility choices; perhaps women who have low preferences for childbearing choose high levels of education. This type of selection problem is well known in research on women’s fertility decisions, since most variables that determine fertility are likely to be matters of choice themselves. Conventional methods of dealing with selection bias rely on using longitudinal data, which were not available to us. The use of instrumental variables is also limited because these estimators are not yet computationally developed for use with count models involving large numbers of independent variables. Future research could usefully focus on the endogeneity of education and how it is associated with immigrant children’s experience as parents and participants in the labor force.
Becker, Gary. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bélanger, Alain and Stephane Gilbert. 2003. The fertility of immigrant women and their Canadian-born daughters, Report on the Demographic Situation in Canada, Statistics Canada Catalogue No. 91-209-XIE. Ottawa: Statistics Canada.
Bélanger, Alain, Lisa Martel, and Éric Caron-Malenfant. 2005. Population Projections for Canada, Provinces and Territories 2005-2031, Statistics Canada Catalogue No. 91-520-XIE. Ottawa: Statistics Canada.
Blau, Francine D. 1992. The fertility of immigrant women: evidence from high fertility source countries, in G. J. Borjas and R. B. Freeman (eds.), Immigration and the Work Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and Source Areas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 93-133.
Bleakley, Hoyt and Aimee Chin. 2004. Language skills and earnings: evidence from childhood immigrants, The Review of Economics and Statistics 86(2): 481-496.
Bleakley, Hoyt and Aimee Chin. 2010. Age at arrival, English proficiency, and social assimilation among US immigrants, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(1): 165-192.
Carter, Marion. 2000. Fertility of Mexican immigrant women in the US: a closer look, Social Science Quarterly 81(1): 404-420.
Chiswick, Barry R. 1991. Speaking, reading, and earnings among low-skilled immigrants, Journal of Labor Economics 9(2): 149-170.
Chiswick, Barry R. and Paul W. Miller. 2001. A model of destination-language acquisition: application to male immigrants in Canada, Demography 38(3): 391-409.
Chiswick, Barry R. and Paul W. Miller. 2004. Linguistic distance: a quantitative measure of the distance between English and other languages. IZA Discussion Paper No. 1246.
Coleman, David. 2006. Immigration and ethnic change in low-fertility countries: a third demographic transition, Population and Development Review 32(3): 401-446.
Coleman, David and Sylvie Dubuc. 2010. The fertility of ethnic minority populations in the United Kingdom, 1960s-2006, Population Studies 64(1): 19-41.
Corak, Miles. 2008. Immigration in the long run: the education and earnings mobility of second-generation Canadians, IRPP Choices 14(13): 1-29.
Dustmann, Christian. 1994. Speaking fluency, writing fluency and earnings of migrants, Journal of Population Economics 7(2): 133-156.
Dustmann, Christian and A. van Soest. 2002. Language and the earnings of immigrants, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55(3): 473-492.
Dustmann, Christian and F. Fabbri. 2003. Language proficiency and labour market performance of immigrants in the UK, Economic Journal 113(489): 695-717.
Espenshade, Thomas J. and Haishan Fu. 1997. An analysis of language proficiency among immigrants, American Sociological Review 62(2): 288-305.
Espinosa, Kristin E. and Douglas S. Massey. 1997. Determinants of English proficiency among Mexican migrants to the United States, International Migration Review 31(1): 28-50.
Ferrer, Ana, David Green, and Craig Riddell. 2006. The effect of literacy on immigrant earnings, Journal of Human Resources 41(2): 380-410.
Ferrer, Ana and Craig Riddell. 2008. Education, credentials, and immigrant earnings, Canadian Journal of Economics 41(1): 186-216.
Forste, Renata and Marta Tienda. 1996. What’s behind racial and ethnic fertility differentials?, Population and Development Review 22(Suppl.): 109-133.
Galor, Oded and David Weil. 1996. The gender gap, fertility and growth, American Economic Review 86(3): 374-387.
Georgiadis, Andreas and Alan Manning. 2011. Change and continuity among minority communities in Britain, Journal of Population Economics 24(2): 541-568.
Goldstein, Sydney and Alice Goldstein. 1981. The impact of migration on fertility: an ‘own children’ analysis for Thailand, Population Studies 35(2): 265-284.
Guinnane, Timothy W., Carolyn M. Moehling, and Cormac Ó Gráda. 2006. The fertility of the Irish in America in 1910, Explorations in Economic History 43(3): 465-485.
Hervitz, H. M. 1985. Selectivity, adaptation, or disruption? A comparison of alternative hypotheses on the effects of migration on fertility: the case of Brazil, International Migration Review 19(2): 293-317.
Jasso, Guillermina. 2004. Have the occupational skills of new legal immigrants to the United States changed over time? Evidence from the immigrant cohorts of 1977, 1982, and 1994, in D. S. Massey and J. E. Taylor (eds.), International Migration: Prospects and Policies in a Global Market. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 261-285.
Kahn, Joan. 1988. Immigrant selectivity and fertility adaptation in the United States, Social Forces 67(1): 108-128.
Kahn, Joan. 1994. Immigrant and native fertility during the 1980s: adaptation and expectations for the future, International Migration Review 28(3): 501-519.
Kalbach, W. 1970. The Impact of Immigration on Canada’s Population. Ottawa: Queen’s Printer.