The effects of earlier income variation on mortality: An analysis of Norwegian register data

Ka˚re Bævre and Øystein Kravdal
Norwegian Institute of Public Health

Several studies have shown a positive relationship between mortality and episodes of income decline, unemployment, or poverty shortly before death or in the more distant past. Our objective was to analyse the mortality effects of earlier income changes more generally, net of the overall level. We used Norwegian register data that included individual histories of annual labour income and focused on mortality among men aged 50-69 in 1990-2002. Men in this age group who, during the preceding 15 years, had experienced at least two substantial falls in income as well as at least one substantial increase, or vice versa, experienced an excess mortality of 17 percent. For men who experienced fewer changes, there were only weak indications of excess mortality. Variation dominated by falls in income did not have a more adverse effect than variation dominated by rises.

Introduction

An inverse relationship between the chance that a person of a certain age dies and his or her income a few years earlier has been established in many studies. The relationship is thought to reflect the causal effects of material disadvantages resulting from low income and the associated psychosocial stress, as well as selection. Much attention has also been devoted to health and mortality among persons who have recently experienced income decline, in particular as a result of unemployment. Furthermore, there has been an increasing interest in examining the importance of income levels and income changes further back in time, which may be considered part of a broader effort to learn about the health implications of experiences and exposures in earlier stages of the life course.

In studies of earlier income, various measures of the lifetime income level have been included in the regression models, and some authors have examined effects of the number of income falls or the number of spells of poverty. A few investigators have also estimated how various measures of health status are influenced by earlier income changes more generally, in particular by also considering income increases. For example, studies reported effects of income change over the previous years on circulatory diseases, studying the effects of changes in absolute and relative income over a decade period on two health outcomes at the end of the period, and measured the effects of income decline and income increase over the years preceding their study.

These analyses aim to control for common individual determinants of income and health that are unobserved and constant, using a fixed-effects or difference-in-difference approach. In such designs, the aim is to identify the effect of the income level through the relationship between changes in income and changes in health. The focus on income changes is purely instrumental, and there is no interest or focus on any substantive effect of the change itself.

The aim of our study was to add to knowledge of the effects of earlier income changes on mortality, effects we believe to be considerably more complex than is reflected in reports of previous studies. Our analysis focused on the impact of changes over and beyond their effects through the income level. This distinction is lacking in many existing studies, which often do not condition on the income level when estimating effects of income change. In consequence, the resulting estimates are somewhat hard to interpret.
These analyses aim to control for common individual determinants of income and health that are unobserved and constant, using a fixed-effects or difference-in-difference approach. In such designs, the aim is to identify the effect of the (current or lagged) income level through the relationship between changes in income and changes in health. The focus on income changes is purely instrumental, and there is no interest or focus on any substantive effect of the change itself.

The aim of our study was to add to knowledge of the effects of earlier income changes on mortality, effects we believe to be considerably more complex than is reflected in reports of previous studies. Our analysis focused on the impact of changes over and beyond their effects through the income level. This distinction is lacking in many existing studies, which often do not condition on the income level when estimating effects of income change. In consequence, the resulting estimates are somewhat hard to interpret. For example, to some extent the effects of income falls can reflect the fact that individuals who have had many falls have had a generally low overall income level, or at least currently have a relatively low income level. Furthermore, we considered not only income falls but also income rises, which have received little attention in previous studies. Taking income change in both directions into account is valuable even if the main goal is to assess the impact of income falls. In particular, an observed income decline may either be the end of a peak or the start of a trough, so that what seem to be the effects of income declines may actually also reflect the effects of income variation more generally, including increases. This fact seems not to have been fully appreciated in earlier studies.

We seek to contribute both theoretically and empirically to an understanding of the effects of income change on mortality and divide the paper into two main parts accordingly. In the first part of the paper we analyze theoretically how income change, through various mechanisms, may produce effects on mortality that are far from self-evident. The arguments build on common ideas about the material and psychosocial effects of economic resources. We take these ideas one step further by incorporating ideas from consumer theory on how consumption at a certain point in time depends on the income trajectory, and by making an assumption about the individual’s own past being a relevant reference point in the psychosocial pathway. Additionally, we build on widely accepted notions about diminishing health returns to consumption and long-term health implications of earlier health and health behavior.

In the second part of the paper, we report the use of Norwegian register data to estimate the effects of income change, given the income level. The data we used are very rich in that they included complete cohorts and allowed us to consider income changes over a longer period (15 years) than commonly used in such investigations. As we discuss in the theory section, we would ideally have studied the role of both individual and household income, but our data allowed only the former. Because men have been the main wage earners, especially during the first decades covered by the data, the development over time in individual income has been more similar to the development in household income for men than for women. We have therefore chosen to study men exclusively. The second main limitation of our data is that we were not able to identify those who had retired. To exclude the majority of the retired, we set an upper age limit at age 69.

More specifically, we estimated discrete-time hazard regression models for mortality of men aged 50-69 in 1990-2002. The models included the number of income rises and falls over the preceding 15 years, or alternatively the standard deviation from trend. While much of the existing literature on income decline has focused on the most dramatic reductions, such as those caused by unemployment or movement into poverty (which is generally uncommon in Nordic countries), our measures capture more moderate changes as well.

General ideas about the effects of earlier income changes rest on four general ideas or assumptions. Firstly, a person’s consumption of health-promoting goods is positively influenced by his or her income at that point and negatively affected by uncertainty about future income. Secondly, consumption or income relative to certain standards or expectations may also have a health effect through a psychosocial pathway. Thirdly, the health influences of income are likely to be concave. Finally, health and health behavior at any point in an individual’s life probably have long-term implications.
Associated with poorer health outcomes are income variability and job insecurity, which can be tightly connected in several situations. However, there are also reasons to expect similar stress effects from the more general economic insecurity embodied in income variation.

There is a growing research literature on the shape of the relationship between recent income and health outcomes. The results are not fully consistent, but the majority of studies report that the relationship is not uniformly linear. Rather, the contribution to better health from a given increase in income tends to be higher at lower levels of income than at higher levels, indicating that the function is concave. Some studies find more extreme versions with a threshold value beyond which there is little or no effect of additional income.

It is a core idea in life-course epidemiology that health and health behavior in one period have implications for later health and mortality. More precisely, the effects of income on health and health behavior discussed above probably have consequences for mortality many years later. Stated differently, mortality in any given year depends on the accumulated effects of earlier health and health behavior and thus a long income history. On the other hand, income in the most recent years is still likely to be more important than income in earlier years.

We now explain how income changes may affect mortality, given the general ideas just presented, and identify three main causal pathways. By 'change' we mean a substantial difference compared not only to one particular year but to a longer period that may reflect the income level that, to some extent, the individual has become used to and may expect for the future. Such differences are most likely to have implications for consumption and be relevant for psychosocial stress mechanisms.

The experience of an income change in either direction will generally increase uncertainty about future incomes, at least if the change is unanticipated. This uncertainty may induce psychosocial stress that is detrimental to health. Uncertainty may also lead to precautionary saving and thus a lower level of consumption of health-promoting goods. It seems plausible to suppose that the more changes a person has experienced, the stronger the feeling of uncertainty.

The second pathway follows from the assumed concavity of the relationship between income and health. Under the concavity assumption, an individual with periods of income fluctuation (below and above average) will generally exhibit higher mortality compared to someone with a constant income level, an application of Jensen's inequality.

The third pathway applies only if psychosocial stress is affected by comparisons with own income levels in the past. An income fall then has an additional detrimental effect on mortality because it entails a feeling of deprivation relative to earlier years, while an income increase lowers mortality because it entails a relative improvement.

In conclusion, two mechanisms produce the detrimental health effects of both an income rise and an income fall (though not necessarily equally strong), conditional on average income. The third mechanism is asymmetric and produces a beneficial effect of an income rise that in principle might outweigh the adverse effects.

Individual and household income are relevant in different ways for assessing the impact of income changes on health. For the material consumption effects, household income is probably at least as influential as individual income, both because of its importance for individual consumption and because it is a key determinant of the joint household consumption from which all members may benefit. For the psychosocial pathway, empirical evidence suggests that individual income may be just as relevant as, or even more relevant than, household income, particularly for comparisons with past years. 

When calculating household income one should adjust for household composition. Given the focus on income changes, using such an adjusted measure introduces new complications. For example, a pronounced reduction in adjusted household income could be entirely due to the birth of a child while both parents maintain their incomes. Such household changes may themselves have, or be associated with, conditions that have consequences for health and health behavior quite different from those concerned here. 

It is not obvious whether individual income or household income is the most relevant. Since there are specific advantages and disadvantages associated with both, one should ideally use individual income and household income alternately in complementary analyses.
Confounding by closely associated factors. Because few researchers have had access to data that allow the effects of income and those of work to be separated, the effects of observed changes in income usually also reflect effects of changes in work activity. Most importantly, many episodes of substantial income reductions are caused by unemployment. Unemployment can also affect mortality through other mechanisms, including increased psychosocial stress due to not being at work, feeling of shame, and disadvantages associated with a less structured daily life and less contact with colleagues. Several investigations have documented stress responses to unemployment. When it comes to income rises, the story may be quite different. A person earning a temporarily high income may be working extraordinary hours due to good opportunities, which is associated with excess mortality, at least in the short term. Other factors may also affect a person's work activity and income and mortality as well.

Part 2: An empirical analysis based on Norwegian register data covers the period up to and including 2002, extracted from the Norwegian population register, annual pre-tax labor incomes from 1968 to 2002, and educational attainment. The data analyzed mortality from 1990 to 2002 and its relationship with income history over the preceding 22 years. Income variation within a 15-year period was examined. The pre-tax labor income included unemployment benefits and temporary sickness benefits but excluded pensions and permanent disability benefits. By not accounting for income from savings and other assets or by excluding retired individuals from the analysis, the focus was narrowed to those under 69 years of age. 

Statistical Model: Discrete-time hazard models were estimated. These models included a series of 1-year observations starting in 1990 or when men turned 50, continuing until 2002, age 69, or the date of death or last emigration. The models considered both the income shortly before the time of exposure and the average income over earlier years, using log transformations to reflect the expected concave relationship. The income variation was also measured.

Definition of income changes: Considering the general upward drift in incomes, changes were defined relative to an underlying trend calculated from a 5-year average. An income fall was defined as a decline to a value 15% below the average income over the five preceding years, with subjects classified based on their experience of such falls over a 15-year period. Income rises were defined as increases of at least 30% relative to the average over the preceding five years. The effect of income variability was further analyzed using an indicator of the standard deviation from the trend. 

Selection and causality: The relationship between income and health was interpreted cautiously due to potential confounding factors such as individual risk-taking behaviors, occupational characteristics, and health conditions that could affect income and mortality. Only education, age, and period were controlled in the analysis to reduce the most apparent effects of selection for health.

Results: Summary statistics indicated that 42% of the men had experienced at least one income fall as defined by our criterion during the study period. The analysis provided insights into the relationships between income fluctuations and mortality while taking into account the complexity of the underlying factors.
Jappelli and Pistaferri (2010) considered differentiation by income variation unnecessary in our context, hence we avoided such distinctions. Specifically, an income fall was defined as a decline to a value 15 percent below the average income over the preceding five years, categorizing individuals based on their experience of none, one, or two or more such falls within a 15-year period. Owing to an overall upward income trend, a higher threshold was set for income increases, only considering rises of at least 30 percent relative to the previous five-year average.

Individuals were similarly grouped based on the frequency of these income rises. The chosen thresholds were somewhat arbitrary yet they provided a balanced representation of income volatility, as seen in the symmetric frequencies of income falls and rises. This symmetry was maintained even when different reference periods (3 or 7 years) were tested against the standard 5-year period used.

The methodology notably differentiated types of income shifts. For instance, a 10 percent increase in income relative to the five-year average, followed by a 10 percent decrease the next year, would not qualify as a fall, even if the overall change exceeded 15 percent. This approach focuses on significant declines rather than moderate fluctuations. Conversely, for income peaks followed by reductions, the decline counts only if the new high level persists long enough to elevate the five-year average significantly.

Our model identified two key properties: it avoided recognizing regular, substantial income increases as multiple rises unless each was sufficiently large, and treated steady, sizable decreases similarly.

We also explored a broader model incorporating a measure of income volatility, calculated as the square root of the average squared deviations from the five-year average income. Unlike traditional standard deviation estimates, our model didn't overly penalize steady income trends.

In studying the relationship between income and health, one must consider numerous confounding factors influencing both wages and health outcomes, such as occupational risks and personal health conditions, which could both reflect and influence income variability. Recognizing these complexities, our study controlled for education, age, and period using administrative registry data, acknowledging that these variables might not capture all nuances influencing employment and health.

Analyzed data showed 42 percent of men experienced at least one major income drop, and 40 percent witnessed at least one significant rise over the periods studied. Income two years prior inversely correlated with mortality, with more pronounced effects seen in groups with the highest income fluctuations. Variations in mortality rates were not significantly attributed to fluctuations around the major income changes, suggesting that minor deviations had a negligible impact on the broader trends observed. 

Ultimately, consistent with previous findings, higher educational levels and recent income positively influenced survival rates, while variations in long-term income did not significantly alter mortality risks beyond those captured by recent income levels. This nuanced understanding of income dynamics underscores the complex interplay between economic factors and health outcomes.
When the indicator of income variation was excluded from the model, the effect of the average income was significant (0.884, CI 0.796-0.980) and was almost the same as the effect of income 2 years before the time of exposure. The low mortality seen among those with a high average income according to this simpler model seems to be explained by the lower amount of variation in this group. We also tried different limits in our classification of income falls and rises, counting reductions of 30 percent and increases of 50 percent. The pattern was quite similar, with 16 percent excess mortality among those men who had experienced at least one fall and at least one decline. There was symmetry with respect to falls and increases. The most striking difference was the clearer excess mortality among the very few who had experienced two declines and no rise, or vice versa.

In the next step, we included an alternative measure of income variability: the standard deviation from the trend, as measured by the average over the five preceding years (mean 46.8, standard deviation 134.43). With this specification, both the effect of recent income and the effect of average income are significant, and they are of the same size. High variability raises mortality significantly, though it is not an effect that matters substantively. For example, a one-standard-deviation increase in variability is associated with only a 0.8 percent increase in mortality.

When this alternative measure of income variation was included in addition to the other main measure of income variation, the effects of the main measure were essentially the same as those shown previously, and the effect of the alternative measure was far from significant (p=0.41). In other words, there does not seem to be an additional effect of small variation around the larger falls and rises considered in the main measure, and the alternative measure is not able to capture much of the effect of these larger changes.

Interestingly, mortality seems to increase by just as much regardless of whether the income variation is dominated by falls or increases. This does not accord equally well with all the above-mentioned ideas, and may suggest that the concavity argument or the uncertainty argument, which do not involve the direction of the changes to the same extent as the other arguments, is relatively important. On the other hand, one may consider the findings as lending little support to the argument about income relative to the past few years, which predicts higher mortality among those experiencing more falls than rises, than among those experiencing the opposite.

We believe the quality of the income histories was high, since they were based on tax registers rather than personal recollections. We were also able to exclude individuals with periods abroad when they may have had incomes not registered by Norwegian authorities. However, the study also had some limitations related to the fact that changes in labour income are due to any combination of changes in working hours and changes in hourly wages. The adverse effects of income change that we observe may to some extent reflect the negative consequences for health of the non-economic effects of unemployment or even of voluntary increases in working hours. The separation of such effects is generally difficult, and was not facilitated by the data available to us. Furthermore, we may not have fully excluded the retired, who have a much higher purchasing power than is indicated by their labour income, and we have not been able to take into account financial incomes from savings and other assets, wealth, taxes, and public transfers, all of which are important for people’s purchasing power.

Our analysis suggests that earlier studies of the effects of income reductions have missed some of the story. A change that is considered to be a fall can actually be either the beginning of a trough or the end of a peak, which substantively are two quite different phenomena. What are referred to as estimates of effects of income falls can therefore reflect a combination of rises and falls, both of which may have an adverse effect on mortality according to our theoretical arguments and empirical results. In fact, when a fall is observed, it is quite likely that there have been several falls and rises (i.e., a fall can primarily be an indication of a generally large variation). Therefore, one should consider income variation in more detail than has been done in previous studies. However, it is not obvious what kind of income changes could reasonably be considered falls and rises. How large should the change be, and compared to what? If income is compared with the income level in earlier years, how many years should be taken into account? Is the average the most relevant measure, or should the direction of the trend within the period also be considered as an indication of what the individual might expect for the ensuing years? We chose a definition that we believe made good sense, but further refinements should be a topic for future research.

We hope that our findings and arguments will stimulate additional research on the association between income variation and mortality, preferably using data that include information on all types of income, for all household members. With such data, the analysis could easily be extended to women and to the retired. Studies that were able to control better for selection would also be welcome. If patterns similar to the ones we have identified are confirmed in these studies, the implications for public health would be that there is a rationale for avoiding large income variation, and that individuals who have highly varying incomes may deserve special attention.
Individual income or household income. Our study deals with only one of the four. For two main reasons, we might have seen different patterns if we had considered women instead of men in our analysis based on individual income. Firstly, the relative importance of changes in individual income and changes in household income may be different for women. For example, the psychosocial effects of success relative to the past in terms of own income may generally be less prominent for women. Secondly, the relationship between changes in individual income and changes in household income is probably also different, because on average women contribute less to household income.

Furthermore, it was a limitation of our study that we controlled only for age, period, and education, given that several other factors may affect mortality and working hours and wages. It should be noted, however, that we also experimented with including marital status and crude measures of occupation in some models, but did not find this to alter the results in any important way.

Broader implications

Some recent studies have shown pro-cyclical mortality at the aggregate level, although there is no agreement about whether this is because working-age adults themselves have a different lifestyle when incomes are higher and they perhaps work more, or whether everyone is adversely influenced by the generally higher income levels and economic activity (e.g., Tapia Granados 2005; Ruhm 2007; Miller et al. 2009). It is not obvious what our study adds to this discussion. We show that an increase in income raises mortality, but this estimate is from a model where the income level is controlled for. The overall effect of an income increase cannot be predicted from our results, because an income increase will also contribute positively to the income level, and therefore positively to health.

The main message

Our analysis suggests that earlier studies of the effects of income reductions have missed some of the story. A change that is considered to be a fall can actually be either the beginning of a trough or end of a peak, which substantively are two quite different phenomena. What are referred to as estimates of effects of income falls can therefore reflect a combination of rises and falls, both of which may have an adverse effect on mortality according to our theoretical arguments and empirical results. In fact, when a fall is observed, it is quite likely that there have been several falls and rises (i.e., a fall can primarily be an indication of a generally large variation). Therefore, one should consider income variation in more detail than has been done in previous studies. However, it is not obvious what kind of income changes could reasonably be considered falls and rises. How large should the change be, and compared to what? If income is compared with the income level in earlier years, how many years should be taken into account? Is the average the most relevant measure, or should the direction of trend within the period also be considered as an indication of what the individual might expect for the ensuing years? We chose a definition that we believe made good sense, but further refinements should be a topic for future research.

We hope that our findings and arguments will stimulate additional research on the association between income variation and mortality, preferably using data that include information on all types of income, for all household members. With such data, the analysis could easily be extended to women and to the retired. Studies that were able to control better for selection would also be welcome. If patterns similar to the ones we have identified are confirmed in these studies, the implications for public health would be that there is a rationale for avoiding large income variation, and that individuals who have highly varying incomes may deserve special attention.
Mackenbach, J. P., P. Martikainen, C. W. Looman, J. A. Dalstra, A. E. Kunst, E. Lahelma, SEdHA working group. 2005. The shape of the relationship between income and self-assessed health: an international study, International Journal of Epidemiology 34(2): 286-293. 

Macleod, J. and G. D. Smith. 2003. Psychosocial factors and public health: a suitable case for treatment?, Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 57(8): 565-570.

Marmot, M. and R. G. Wilkinson. 2001. Psychosocial and material pathways in the relationship between income and health: a response to Lynch et al., British Medical Journal 322(7296): 1233-1236.

Martikainen, P., T. Valkonen, and H. Moustgaard. 2009. The effects of individual taxable income, household taxable income, and household disposable income on mortality in Finland, 1998-2004, Population Studies 63(2): 147-162.

Massakowski, K. N. 2008. Is the duration of poverty and unemployment a risk factor for heavy drinking, Social Science and Medicine 67(6): 947-955.

McDonough, P., G. J. Duncan, D. Williams, and J. House. 1997. Income dynamics and adult mortality in the United States, 1972 through 1989, American Journal of Public Health 87(9): 1476-1483.

McDonough, P. and P. Berglund. 2003. Histories of poverty and self-rated health trajectories, Journal of Health and Social Behavior 44(2): 198-214.

McDonough, P., A. Sacker, and R. D. Wiggins. 2005. Time on my side? Life course trajectories of poverty and health, Social Science and Medicine 61(8): 1795-1808.

McKee-Ryan, F. M., Z. Song, C. R. Wanberg, and A. J. Kinicki. 2005. Psychological and physical well-being during unemployment: a meta-analytic study, Journal of Applied Psychology 90(1): 53-76.

Menchik, P. L. 1993. Economic status as a determinant of mortality among black and white older men: does poverty kill?, Population Studies 47(3): 427-436.

Miller, D. L., M. E. Page, A. H. Stevens, and M. Filipski. 2009. Why are recessions good for your health?, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 99(2): 122-127.

Nylén, L., M. Voss, and B. Floderus. 2001. Mortality among women and men relative to unemployment, part time work, overtime work, and extra work: a study based on data from the Swedish twin registry, Occupational and Environmental Medicine 58(1): 52-57.

OECD. 2006. Employment Outlook 2006. Paris: OECD.

van Ourti, T. 2003. Socio-economic inequality in ill-health amongst the elderly. Should one use current or permanent income?, Journal of Health Economics 22(2): 219-241.

Pham-Kanter, G. 2009. Social comparison and health: can having richer friends and neighbors make you sick?, Social Science and Medicine 69(3): 335-344.

Prause, J., D. Dooley, and J. Huh. 2009. Income volatility and psychological depression, American Journal of Community Psychology 43(1): 57-70.

Qi, V., S. P. Phillips, and W. M. Hopman. 2006. Determinants of healthy lifestyle and use of preventive screening in Canada, BMC Public Health 6: 275.

Reeves, M. J. and A. P. Rafferty. 2005. Healthy lifestyle characteristics among adults in the United States, 2000, Archives of Internal Medicine 165(8): 854-885.

Rehkopf, D. H., L. F. Berkman, B. Coull, and N. Krieger. 2008. The non-linear risk of mortality by income level in a healthy population: US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey mortality follow-up cohort, 1988-2001, BMC Public Health 10: 383.

Ruhm, C. J. 2007. A healthy economy can break your heart, Demography 44(4): 829-848.

Sapolsky, R. M. 2005. The influence of social hierarchy on primate health, Science 308(5722): 648-652.

Statistics Norway. 2012. Life tables 2010.

Strully, K. W. 2009. Job loss and health in the U.S. labor market, Demography 46(2): 221-246.

Subramanyam, M., I. Kawachi, L. Berkman, and S. V. Subramanian. 2009. Relative deprivation in income and self-rated health in the United States, Social Science and Medicine 69(3): 327-334.

Sullivan, D. and T. von Wachter. 2009. Average earnings and long-term mortality: evidence from administrative data, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 99(2): 133-138.

Tapia Granados, J. A. 2005. Increasing mortality during the expansions of the US economy, 1900-1996, International Journal of Epidemiology 34(6): 1194-1202.

Theodossiou, I. 1998. The effects of low-pay and unemployment on psychological well-being: a logistic regression approach, Journal of Health Economics 17(1): 85-104.

Tåhlin, M. 1989. The value and cost of work: a study of the consequences of wage labour for the individual, European Sociological Review 5(2): 115-131.

Voss, M., L. Nylén, B. Floderus, F. Dideriksen, and P. D. Terry. 2004. Unemployment and early cause-specific mortality: a study based on the Swedish twin registry, American Journal of Public Health 94(12): 2155-2161.

Wilkinson, R. G. 1999. Health, hierarchy, and social anxiety, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 896(1): 48-63.

Wolfson, M., G. Rowe, J. F. Gentleman, and M. Tomiak. 1993. Career earnings and death: a longitudinal analysis of older Canadian men, Journal of Gerontology 48(4): S167-S179.