Divergences in Trends in Child and Adult Mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa: Survey Evidence on the Survival of Children and Siblings

Bruno Masquelier, Georges Reniers, and Gilles Pison

1Université Catholique de Louvain, 2London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, 3Institut National d’Études Démographiques

This paper provides an overview of trends in mortality in children aged under 5 and adults between the ages of 15 and 60 in sub-Saharan Africa, using data on the survival of children and siblings collected in Demographic and Health Surveys. Child mortality levels have generally declined and converged over the last 30–40 years, except for stalls in the 1990s. In contrast, adult mortality in many East and Southern African countries has increased markedly due to the rise in HIV incidence. Recently, adult mortality levels have begun to decline in East Africa, sometimes before the large-scale expansion of antiretroviral therapy programs. Surprisingly, some countries without severe HIV epidemics have not shown sustained improvements in adult survival. We argue that model-based estimates, which infer trends by matching indices of child survival to standard mortality schedules, can be misleading as trends in child and adult mortality do not always evolve in tandem.

Keywords: mortality estimation; sub-Saharan Africa; adult mortality; child mortality; siblings; HIV/AIDS

1. Introduction

Trends in child and adult mortality are crucial indicators of population health progress and are ideally monitored through comprehensive vital registration systems. However, most African countries lack complete national coverage in their vital registration systems. Except for South Africa and, until recently, Zimbabwe, less than 25 percent of deaths are recorded in the official records of mainland sub-Saharan Africa and Madagascar. As a result, our understanding of health transitions in this region, particularly for adults, largely relies on model life tables (MLTs).

The United Nations Population Division (UNPD) produces widely used model-based mortality estimates in several steps, including smoothing child mortality trends from survey data and matching these trends to MLTs to estimate background mortality. In countries with significant HIV prevalence, AIDS-related deaths are added, based on epidemiological models. Discrepancies between these model-derived estimates and other sources are addressed by iterative revisions. Continuous refinement ensures consistency with demographic realities and established mortality patterns, but the linkage between child and adult mortality in models can be overly constrained by selected MLTs and assumptions about the HIV epidemic dynamics.

2. Data and Methods

2.1 Estimating Child Mortality

Due to inadequate vital registration data, retrospective reports on child survival from surveys and censuses are employed. Modern censuses in developing countries collect summary birth histories (SBHs), including the total number of children ever born and surviving. Despite indirect mortality estimation methods such as Brass's method being applicable to such data, they require assumptions of steady mortality changes, leading to overly smooth trends. Unlike these indirect methods, we utilize full birth histories (FBHs) from Demographic and Health Surveys (DHSs), providing detailed data on all births by mother, including survival status and age at death or current age.

The analysis included 107 DHSs across 36 sub-Saharan countries from 1986 to 2011. Data reformatted for each survey included the number of deaths and exposure time by age, sex, calendar year, and survey timing. Mortality estimates were derived using generalized additive models (GAM), which include smooth functions of covariates. Details on methodology are available in the online supplement.

The approach allows a precise evaluation of how mortality patterns have evolved, leveraging DHS data's extensive coverage and consistency.
Consistent both with other components of the prevailing demographic regime and with well-established age patterns of mortality (United Nations 2005), the relationship between child and adult mortality in any particular scenario is, however, constrained by the MLT selected and the assumptions made when reconstructing the course of the HIV epidemic. Here, we present an overview of trends in child and adult mortality in sub-Saharan Africa without resorting to MLTs. Instead, we use birth and sibling histories, collected as part of a number of Demographic and Health Surveys (DHSs), and adopt comparable methods to obtain each set of estimates. This approach has the significant advantage of allowing us to evaluate how age patterns of mortality have changed over time. After a description of the estimation method used, we present trends in the two mortality indices 5q0 and 45q15. The first index, 5q0, also referred to as ‘the under-five mortality rate’, indicates the probability, given the mortality regime of the year under consideration, that a newborn will die before reaching its fifth birthday. Similarly, the index 45q15 represents the probability that a person aged 15 will die before reaching his or her sixtieth birthday if faced with the mortality rates prevailing at each age in the year observed. The presentation of the trends is followed by a discussion of changes in age patterns of mortality.

Various types of retrospective reports on child survival can be used to compensate for a lack of vital registration data. Modern censuses in less developed countries typically collect summary birth histories (SBHs), that is, the number of children ever born to women of reproductive age and the number of those children surviving at the date of the census. From SBHs, indirect estimates of mortality can be obtained using Brass’s method or one of its variants. Although these indirect methods can be applied to DHS data, we did not use them because it is unclear how SBHs should be adjusted to account for the underreporting of deaths. In order to establish a time period to which these estimates refer, a steady and unidirectional change in mortality has to be assumed, resulting in mortality trends which are excessively smoothed.

In contrast to the methods outlined above, our estimates make use of full birth histories (FBHs), collected by DHSs. Each history is an exhaustive enumeration by the mother of all her children, giving for each the sex, date of birth, survival status, and current age or age at death. Additional questions locate surviving children within the roster of household members and identify multiple births. We used data from 107 DHSs conducted between 1986 and 2011 and covering 36 sub-Saharan countries. Only four countries (Botswana, Mauritania, Eritrea, and Somalia) with populations numbering over 2 million in 2013 were omitted because they had no publicly available DHS data set.

The DHS data sets were reformatted to obtain the total number of deaths and exposure time for each combination of age, sex, calendar year, and time preceding the survey. The data were pooled within each country and mortality estimates were obtained using a generalized additive model (GAM). GAMs extend generalized linear models by adding a sum of smooth functions of covariates to the linear predictor. The parametric part of the GAM included the child’s age (specified as ‘less than one’ or ‘one to four’) interacted with sex. For the 26 countries that had more than one DHS with FBHs, both the age pattern of mortality and any differentials by sex were allowed to change linearly over time. The number of deaths was assumed to follow an over-dispersed Poisson distribution, with the log of exposure time as an offset parameter. Deaths and exposure time occurring more than 22 years before each survey were discarded. Trends in mortality were smoothed using thin-plate regression splines. The degree of smoothing was selected as part of the fitting of the model by minimizing the generalized cross-validation (GCV) score.
Therapy (ART). It also requires that the level of non-AIDS child mortality be selected somewhat arbitrarily. Plots of estimates of 5q0 for each country with and without the ‘HIV correction’ are presented in Figure S2 in the online supplement.

Estimating adult mortality since 1988, some DHSs have included a module on maternal mortality that includes a standard set of questions designed to elicit an exhaustive list of all the children born to the interviewee’s mother. The information collected on each member of this ‘maternal sibling group’ includes birth order, sex, and survival status. Current age is recorded for surviving siblings, while age at death and years since death are collected for those who have died. Additional questions identify sisters who died when pregnant, during childbirth, or within 2 months after the end of a pregnancy or childbirth. In less developed countries, these ‘sibling histories’ are now a cornerstone of the estimation of maternal and all-cause adult mortality. The Global Burden of Disease Study 2010 (GBD), led by the IHME, made extensive use of sibling histories to estimate mortality rates for countries in sub-Saharan Africa. The GBD estimates were derived using a three-stage process: first, a linear model was used to relate measurements of 5q0 and 45q15 to education, lagged gross domestic product per head, and crude death rates attributable to AIDS as estimated by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS). Second, the residuals from the first stage were smoothed across countries and time. The third stage comprised a Gaussian process regression to combine the data, the sampling and non-sampling variation, and the information from the first two stages to yield final estimates and uncertainty intervals for each country. GBD estimates of adult mortality are not as closely linked to child mortality as is the case for the UNPD estimates, but they are related to a common set of covariates and these covariates are themselves based on extensive modeling. Therefore, while the GBD approach is useful when generating estimates for countries with sparse data, it is not totally adequate when analyzing joint changes in mortality among adults and children. In a study based on 26 DHSs, Timaeus and Jasseh used a more straightforward approach to model adult mortality from DHSs. They pooled all sibling histories in a single Poisson regression, including a standard age pattern, to smooth non-AIDS mortality rates and additional parameters to allow for mortality increases due to AIDS. Only three of the countries included in their study had more than one set of sibling histories. In our study, we used 72 DHSs, covering 34 countries. Deaths and exposure time that predated each survey by 12 years or more were discarded. For 20 of the 34 countries, at least two sets of sibling histories were available. The latter allowed us to fit separate models for each country, using penalized thin-plate regression splines to refine the smoothing of trends. The age pattern of mortality and sex differences were also allowed to change linearly with the duration of each country’s HIV epidemic, starting 4 years after the calendar year in which the UNAIDS HIV prevalence estimate for that nation reached 2 per cent. This 4-year period corresponds approximately to the lag between the development of an HIV epidemic within the general population and the emergence of the resulting changes in adult mortality rates. In cases where only one DHS was available, we used an over-dispersed Poisson regression, assuming a constant rate of change over the 12-year period, and including dummies for age group and sex. Because previous research has shown that respondents tend to underreport deceased siblings, we used an adjustment comparable to that used in the estimation of child mortality discussed above. We pooled all deaths and exposure time for those periods covered by at least two DHSs, and introduced the TIPS as a set of indicator variables in a Poisson regression model controlling for trends and variations in age patterns of mortality. Because the structure of the maternal mortality module in the DHS does not induce interviewers to disproportionately displace or omit recent deaths, the reference TIPS category was set as 1-2 years preceding the survey. As is clear in the lower panel of Figure 1, which shows mortality in the 15-59 age group, the decline in the completeness of death reporting as the interval between death and survey increases is more rapid in this age group than among young children. Compared to the reference period, deaths of males are significantly underreported for periods that precede the survey by 3 years or more. There is also distinct heaping at 10 years before the survey, indicating that respondents had difficulty recalling how many years had passed since a sibling's death. Mortality rates were again adjusted by the reciprocal of the rate ratios. We reiterate that this only corrects for underreporting that is correlated with the TIPS.

Trends in child mortality a summary plot of trends in under-5 mortality by country, within region, is presented for both sexes combined, using a log scale (Figure 2). The geospatial variation in 5q0 for the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s is displayed in Figure 3. Country-specific trends for the years from 1970 to 2010 can be found in Figure S2 in the online supplement. A comparison of Figures 2 and 3 reveals three general trends: (1) child mortality declined in most, but not all, countries between 1970 and 2010; (2) there was a convergence in under-5 mortality rates over this period; and (3) geographical differences in under-5 mortality continue to persist, with the highest levels in West Africa and the lowest levels in East and Southern Africa. Let us first present the general features of these trends, before we describe the exceptions. Under-5 mortality declined from the 1970s to the 2000s in most countries in sub-Saharan Africa. In the 1970s, more than 20 percent of children died before reaching their fifth birthday in the majority of countries. It was rare to find countries with an under-5 mortality rate below 0.13 and the median rate was close to 0.21. By the mid-2000s, very few countries had an under-5 mortality rate above 0.20 and the median rate was close to 0.14. Even though there had been a marked decline, the latter value was still roughly twice the average rate for South Asia (for 2005) and more than 15 times higher than the rates found in industrialized countries. The declines in 5q0 were most pronounced in West African countries. In contrast, child mortality rates appeared to increase in a handful of Southern African countries. Because West African countries had the highest levels of child mortality in the 1970s, and Southern African countries the lowest, the changes over the three decades resulted in a convergence in the levels of 5q0. This finding is consistent with the trend across the decades preceding those presented here described by Hill. One of the more striking features of the 2000s decade is that Southern African countries no longer stand out as having comparatively low child mortality rates. Before 1985, the countries with 5q0 below 10 percent were those in Southern Africa and Kenya in East Africa. By 2010, populations with low child mortality could be found in all regions. Geographical contrasts persist, however, with a gradient in 5q0 across the continent from northwest to southeast. The landlocked Sahelian countries, such as Mali and Niger, always were and continue to be characterized by some of the highest levels of child mortality in the world. Despite the overall convergence, some aberrations and irregularities are noteworthy. In Southern Africa, the values of 5q0 declined in the 1980s, but increased across the later 1990s and 2000s. In Central Africa, levels of child mortality did not change much between the 1980s and the 2000s. However, only a few surveys were available from which trends could be ascertained and their quality is questionable. Our estimates do not suggest a uniform pattern within Central Africa: child mortality levels remained high in the Democratic Republic of Congo, which recorded a 5q0 of around 0.16 in 2005; they stagnated at a relatively low level in Gabon; in the Congo they seem to have increased from relatively low starting values. Angola is the only country in Central Africa which experienced a relatively rapid decline during the 1990s and 2000s. In West Africa, more surveys per country were available, allowing more reliable trends to be reconstructed. These indicated that child mortality declined substantially in all countries in West Africa during the 1970s. The decline then underwent a temporary slowdown, or even a reversal, in some countries during the 1980s and 1990s before accelerating once more during the 2000s. In East Africa, there was also a rapid decline in child mortality during the 2000s, following three decades of disparate trends: a succession of decreases and increases in Burundi, Kenya, and Rwanda; an increase followed by a decrease in Uganda, Madagascar, Mozambique, and Zambia; and a continuous decrease in Malawi and Ethiopia. The factors underlying these trends are very diverse. Progress in infrastructure and in the provision of health programs contributed to the spread of preventative measures, such as vaccination, and effective treatments reduced the impact of the infectious diseases responsible for most childhood deaths. The introduction of measles vaccine in Africa in the late 1970s and early 1980s, for example, coincided with major reductions in child mortality. Because the latter mortality declines were too large to be explained by the prevention of measles alone, the notion emerged that vaccines may have non-specific effects on the immunity and survival of children more generally. Impressive gains in school enrollment also played an important role in enabling all sections of the population to benefit from the improvement in health services. On the other hand, in some countries socio-political instability, war, and the emergence of new diseases or the re-emergence of old ones, may have acted to counterbalance any positive influences. The factor that immediately springs to mind as adversely affecting child mortality in the decades we studied is the HIV/AIDS epidemic. According to Marston et al., in the absence of other causes of death, only 39 percent of children infected with HIV at birth survive to age 5. Even uninfected
Trends for the years from 1970 to 2010 can be found in Figure S2 in the online supplement. A comparison of Figures 2 and 3 reveals three general trends: (1) child mortality declined in most, but not all, countries between 1970 and 2010; (2) there was a convergence in under-5 mortality rates over this period; and (3) geographical differences in under-5 mortality continue to persist, with the highest levels in West Africa and the lowest levels in East and Southern Africa. Let us first present the general features of these trends, before we describe the exceptions.

Under-5 mortality declined from the 1970s to the 2000s in most countries in sub-Saharan Africa. In the 1970s, more than 20 per cent of children died before reaching their fifth birthday in the majority of countries. It was rare to find countries with an under-5 mortality rate below 0.13 and the median rate was close to 0.21. By the mid-2000s, very few countries had an under-5 mortality rate above 0.20 and the median rate was close to 0.14. Even though there had been a marked decline, the latter value was still roughly twice the average rate for South Asia (for 2005) and more than 15 times higher than the rates found in industrialized countries (Hill et al. 2012).

The declines in 5q0 were most pronounced in West African countries. In contrast, child mortality rates appeared to increase in a handful of Southern African countries. Because West African countries had the highest levels of child mortality in the 1970s, and Southern African countries the lowest, the changes over the three decades resulted in a convergence in the levels of 5q0. This finding is consistent with the trend across the decades preceding those presented here described by Hill (1993).

One of the more striking features of the 2000s decade is that Southern African countries no longer stand out as having comparatively low child mortality rates. Before 1985, the countries with 5q0 below 10 per cent were those in Southern Africa and Kenya in East Africa. By 2010, populations with low child mortality could be found in all regions. Geographical contrasts persist, however, with a gradient in 5q0 across the continent from northwest to southeast. The landlocked Sahelian countries, such as Mali and Niger, always were and continue to be characterized by some of the highest levels of child mortality in the world.

Despite the overall convergence, some aberrations and irregularities are noteworthy. (1) In Southern Africa, the values of 5q0 declined in the 1980s, but increased across the later 1990s and 2000s. (2) In Central Africa, levels of child mortality did not change much between the 1980s and the 2000s. However, only a few surveys were available from which trends could be ascertained and their quality is questionable. Our estimates do not suggest a uniform pattern within Central Africa: child mortality levels remained high in the Democratic Republic of Congo, which recorded a 5q0 of around 0.16 in 2005; they stagnated at a relatively low level in Gabon; in the Congo they seem to have increased from relatively low starting values. Angola is the only country in Central Africa which experienced a relatively rapid decline during the 1990s and 2000s. (3) In West Africa, more surveys per country were available, allowing more reliable trends to be reconstructed. These indicated that child mortality declined substantially in all countries in West Africa during the 1970s. The decline then underwent a temporary slowdown, or even a reversal, in some countries during the 1980s and 1990s before accelerating once more during the 2000s. (4) In East Africa, there was also a rapid decline in child mortality during the 2000s, following three decades of disparate trends: a succession of decreases and increases in Burundi, Kenya, and Rwanda; an increase followed by a decrease in Uganda, Madagascar, Mozambique, and Zambia; and a continuous decrease in Malawi and Ethiopia.

The factors underlying these trends are very diverse. Progress in infrastructure and in the provision of health programmes contributed to the spread of preventative measures, such as vaccination, and effective treatments reduced the impact of the infectious diseases responsible for most childhood deaths. The introduction of measles vaccine in Africa in the late 1970s and early 1980s, for example, coincided with major reductions in child mortality. Because the latter mortality declines were too large to be explained by the prevention of measles alone, the notion emerged that vaccines may have non-specific effects on the immunity and survival of children more generally (Aaby et al. 1995). Impressive gains in school enrolment also played an important role in enabling all sections of the population to benefit from the improvement in health services. On the other hand, in some countries socio-political instability, war, and the emergence of new diseases or the re-emergence of old ones, may have acted to counterbalance any positive influences.

The factor that immediately springs to mind as adversely affecting child mortality in the decades we studied is the HIV/AIDS epidemic. According to Marston et al. (2005), in the absence of other causes of death, only 39 per cent of children infected with HIV at birth survive to age 5. Even uninfected children born to seropositive mothers experience excess mortality because their mother’s illness or death may be detrimental to their nutrition and care (Zaba et al. 2005). HIV-driven reversals in the levels of 5q0 occurred in the second half of the 1980s in Kenya and Zambia, in the early 1990s in Zimbabwe, and even later in Namibia and Lesotho. In other countries, where child mortality was still quite high when the epidemic escalated, the impact of HIV/AIDS was often less visible because other factors were operating to reduce mortality. This was probably the case in Malawi, which experienced a continuous decline in child mortality, with only a slight slowdown in the 1980s, despite an HIV/AIDS epidemic of a similar magnitude to that in Zambia.

A second set of factors underlying the mortality reversals that characterize some countries was economic, social, and political turmoil and, in some cases, warfare. For example, the increase in child mortality in Uganda in the 1970s was probably related to the civil war and the collapse of the economy; later it would be exacerbated by the HIV epidemic. The civil war that followed independence in Mozambique also coincided with an increase in child mortality at the end of the 1970s and during the 1980s. The Rwandan genocide of 1994 is clearly visible in the right-hand graph of Figure 2 as a sharp spike in child mortality rates. Because this spike was apparent in the raw rates, we removed the 1993–95 period from the GAM and estimated under-5 mortality rates for this period from a simple quasi-Poisson regression, with each of the three years included as a dummy variable.

A slowdown or reversal of child mortality trends in the 1980s and 1990s also occurred in several countries that did not experience explicit economic, social, or political crises. This was the case for several countries in West and Central Africa, such as Burkina Faso, Liberia, Nigeria, and Senegal—none of which had to deal with a severe HIV epidemic either. The decline in child mortality resumed in most of these countries by the end of the 1990s or the early 2000s. Some authors have argued that these slowdowns were due to structural adjustment programmes which imposed reductions in government spending on health and education (Cornia et al. 1987), but there is little evidence to support this claim (Behrman 1988). Other factors may have played a role, as the case of Senegal suggests (Pison et al. 2013). HIV prevalence in Senegal never exceeded 1 per cent among adults (Ndiaye and Ayad 2006; ANSD 2012) and the country benefited from a relatively stable political climate, yet trends in the rate of child mortality were nonetheless irregular. After a rapid decline from the mid-1970s to the end of the 1980s, child mortality rates stalled or, on occasion, increased during the 1990s, but rapidly decreased after the turn of the century.

Senegal’s pattern of child mortality decline resembles that found in many sub-Saharan African countries over the same period, but is unusual in the data sources that exist there for the monitoring of national trends in child mortality. In addition, three rural HDSSs have been in operation in the country for almost 25 years. These closely monitor all vital events occurring in the community under study and each death is usually followed by a ‘verbal autopsy’ interview in order to determine the underlying cause.

Trends in child mortality observed at the three Senegalese HDSSs, at Bandafassi, Mlomp, and Niakhar, are comparable to those for the country as a whole (Figure S6, online supplement). The decline in child mortality in the 1970s and 1980s at the three HDSSs has been ascribed to a reduction in mortality from infectious diseases, such as measles, as a result of large-scale vaccination campaigns (Desgrées du Loû et al. 1995; Pison et al. 1995). During the 1990s, however, vaccination coverage reached a plateau and deaths from measles failed to decline further. Another reason for the failure to make progress in the 1990s was malaria. Figure S6 presents trends in the malaria-related mortality rate in children under the age of 5 in Mlomp and Niakhar. Deaths from malaria were identified from verbal autopsy data and by laboratory tests.
National trends in child mortality. In addition, three rural HDSSs have been in operation in the country for almost 25 years. These closely monitor all vital events occurring in the community under study and each death is usually followed by a ‘verbal autopsy’ interview in order to determine the underlying cause. Trends in child mortality observed at the three Senegalese HDSSs, at Bandafassi, Mlomp, and Niakhar, are comparable to those for the country as a whole. The decline in child mortality in the 1970s and 1980s at the three HDSSs has been ascribed to a reduction in mortality from infectious diseases, such as measles, as a result of large-scale vaccination campaigns. During the 1990s, however, vaccination coverage reached a plateau and deaths from measles failed to decline further. Another reason for the failure to make progress in the 1990s was malaria. Deaths from malaria were identified from verbal autopsy data and by laboratory tests in Mlomp. The substantial mortality increase observed during the 1990s was identified as being directly associated with the spread of chloroquine resistance in the malaria parasite.

Similar patterns were seen at all three HDSSs and help to explain the national-level trends in Senegal. In the 2000s, a renewed commitment to vaccination and increased investments in new anti-malaria programs were among the factors which contributed to a resumption of the decline in Senegal’s child mortality rates. In sub-Saharan Africa as a whole, vaccination coverage also increased in the new century, after a decade of stagnation.

Turning now to the comparability of estimates, we find close agreement between our estimates and those developed by the IGME and the IHME for countries which have several DHSs available, such as Benin, Chad, and Liberia. In countries with only one DHS, there is a greater discrepancy between our estimates and those of the IGME and IHME.

Adult mortality trends also show significant patterns. In the majority of sub-Saharan African countries, adult mortality either stagnated or increased over the three decades. The median value of the estimates of adult mortality for males hovered around 0.25 in the mid-1980s but had increased to 0.40 by 2000. By 2007 it had declined again to 0.34. These values were significantly higher than those observed in most West European countries.

Throughout most of the 1990s, the increasing diversity in adult mortality levels was largely driven by the rates of mortality in East and Southern Africa, which saw steep increases highly suggestive of the massive impact of HIV/AIDS. The stabilization of incidence rates is typical of a maturing epidemic, but the declines which followed were probably also the result of certain developments: changes in sexual behaviour, the adoption of risk avoidance strategies such as more careful partner selection, and the expansion of medical interventions including male circumcision and ART.

Adult mortality between ages 15 and 60 peaked around the early 2000s in several East African countries. Our estimates suggest that adult mortality levels in East and Southern Africa are now among the highest on the continent. In Ethiopia and Congo, however, there appears to have been a decrease in adult mortality rates since the early 1990s, though these estimates are tentative.
Throughout most of the 1990s, increasing regional diversity in adult mortality levels was largely driven by the rates of mortality in East and Southern Africa, which saw steep increases highly suggestive of the massive impact of HIV/AIDS. In several East African countries, the mortality rates had been rising since the mid-1980s, and in Kenya, Malawi, and Zambia, 45q15 doubled over the course of the 1990s. A similar, if somewhat lagged, pattern characterizes Swaziland, Lesotho, Namibia, and Zimbabwe. The geography of the surge in adult mortality rates echoes earlier patterns of HIV incidence. Incidence rates peaked in the early 1990s in East Africa, and in the mid to late 1990s in Southern Africa, before declining. The stabilization of incidence rates is typical of a maturing epidemic, but the declines which followed were probably also the result of three particular developments: changes in sexual behaviour; the adoption of risk avoidance strategies such as more careful partner selection; and, more recently, the expansion of medical interventions including male circumcision and ART. Interestingly, adult mortality rates in East Africa had already peaked before ART was delivered to any significant proportion of the infected population. It is estimated that only 2 per cent of the total population in need of treatment were receiving ART in 2003 in sub-Saharan Africa. ART coverage rates increased to 12 per cent in 2005 and 30 per cent in 2007. Adult mortality between ages 15 and 60 peaked in 2000 in Malawi, in 2001 in Uganda, in 2002 in Zambia, and in 2003 in Namibia and Kenya. Our estimates suggest that Malawi, Kenya, and Tanzania had some of the lowest adult mortality rates in sub-Saharan Africa in the 1980s. As a direct result of the severe HIV epidemics in East and Southern Africa, however, adult mortality levels in these regions are now among the highest on the continent. The most positive story from East Africa, if not sub-Saharan Africa as a whole, comes from Ethiopia where 45q15 slowly increased during the early 1990s, but after the figure for men peaked at 0.45, it is estimated that it fell by 40 per cent over the next 15 years. Congo, in Central Africa, also appears to have experienced a sustained decline in adult mortality since the mid-1990s, but the level from which the rates began to decline was relatively high and, as is the case for most other Central African countries, the estimates for Congo are based on just one survey and must therefore be considered no more than tentative. Adult mortality trends in East and Southern Africa are not surprising given the magnitude of the HIV epidemic in these regions. More puzzling is the fact that few, if any, countries in other parts of sub-Saharan Africa registered sustained adult mortality declines in the three decades studied. Although there were modest gains in adult survival in the Sahel in the 1980s, most West and Central African countries experienced either stagnating or increasing mortality levels after 1990. In a few West African countries where mortality increases were most explicit, they can be attributed to AIDS mortality, as in Cameroon and Côte d’Ivoire, or to the consequences, both direct and indirect, of political instability and civil strife as was the case in Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Rwanda. The spike in adult mortality in Rwanda in 1994, was the direct result of civil war and genocide. Trends in the other West and Central African countries are less easily explained without detailed analysis of changes in the causes of death but, unfortunately, the necessary data are scarce. It is almost certain, however, that high, and possibly increasing, mortality rates from non-communicable diseases and external injuries would play a role in any explanation offered for the lack of sustained improvements in adult survival in West Africa and elsewhere in sub-Saharan Africa. A recent review highlights considerable heterogeneity in the prevalence of non-communicable diseases (such as cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and cancer), but a common concern is that many of these conditions often go undiagnosed and untreated, resulting in a mortality rate that is higher than necessary.
Elsewhere in sub-Saharan Africa, there is considerable heterogeneity in the prevalence of non-communicable diseases such as cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and cancer. Many of these conditions often go undiagnosed and untreated, resulting in a mortality rate that is higher than necessary. Populations, particularly in Southern Africa, now face the double or even triple burden of high mortality rates from infectious diseases, chronic conditions, and injuries.

There are several implications for mortality measurement from comparing levels and trends in adult mortality estimated from different sources. DHS sibling histories yielded mortality estimates that were lower than those calculated by UNPD, especially for West African countries not severely affected by HIV. This discrepancy may be due to a relatively large downward bias in the reporting of mortality in siblings in West Africa compared to East and Southern Africa. Larger family sizes and a higher incidence of polygyny in West Africa could contribute to disproportionate omissions of siblings. Another implication is that trends in adult mortality can differ depending on the sources used, which is particularly an issue in countries not heavily affected by HIV, such as Guinea and Burkina Faso. Trends captured by sibling survival histories are more reliable even though the levels estimated may be too low. Estimates of mortality of men and women derived from survival reported in sibling histories tend to produce larger differences between the sexes than found in UNPD estimates, particularly in countries severely affected by HIV. Our estimation approach allowed for the sex differences in mortality to change over time in countries like Côte d'Ivoire, Kenya, Malawi, and Uganda, where the mortality disadvantage of men appears to increase over time. These discrepancies could point to flaws in the HIV prevalence data from UNAIDS factored into UNPD estimates.

Overall, our estimates of adult mortality are in line with, though slightly lower than, those developed by IHME. The IHME uses additional, complementary data sources, including data on recent household deaths, which may inflate their figures above ours.

By applying the estimation methods described to different but comparable data sources, changes in the mortality of adults and children can be analyzed side by side. Estimates indicate that in countries without widespread epidemics, declines in child mortality may not correspond with declines in adult mortality, as observed in Senegal, or vice versa, as in Niger pre-1990.

It is evident that sub-Saharan Africa will fall far behind several of the targets of the Millennium Development Goals set in 2000. Despite some improvements in child survival in countries like Madagascar and Liberia, only a few sub-Saharan countries are on track to achieve the goal of reducing their 1990 under-5 mortality rate by 67 percent by 2015. Adult mortality trends in sub-Saharan Africa have largely been disconnected from trends in child mortality, especially from the late 1980s. In only a few countries, such as Madagascar, Senegal, and Ethiopia, have trends in adult mortality even approximately followed the path of prevailing under-5 mortality rates.

The conjunction of increasing convergence of national childhood mortality rates with growing divergence in adult mortality rates over the last two decades has been a striking feature of the demography of sub-Saharan Africa. Estimates developed by the UN capture the marked heterogeneity of adult mortality rates but not its full extent. This disparity provides an impetus for more extensive use of empirical estimates of adult mortality, with the UNPD starting to use the two-parameter Brass logit model for some West African countries.

Ratios stem from the underestimation of adult mortality from data on siblings; it is unlikely that child mortality rates were overestimated. It is difficult to establish whether the underestimation of adult mortality is limited to surveys conducted in West Africa or whether it affects all DHSs, since most countries in other regions of the continent experienced severe HIV epidemics, and these tend to distort the relationship between adult and child mortality. Even in West Africa, the distortion can be seen in the mortality estimates for Cameroon, between 1986 and 2003, and Côte d’Ivoire from 1982–2004.

The path of adult-to-child mortality ratios shown in Figure 6 differs between three groups of countries in East and Southern Africa. In the first, the data from Ethiopia for the period from 1988 to 2009 and from Madagascar between 1980 and 2007 are in line with the series of HMD rates, and in reasonable agreement with, respectively, the North and West MLTs. In the second, trends for Kenya, Tanzania, and Malawi, as well as Zambia and Uganda (not shown in Figure 6), follow a horseshoe-shaped pattern, where declines in child mortality coincide with increases and then decreases in adult mortality. In the final group, the three Southern African countries show a quite distinct pattern. At first, in both Zimbabwe and Namibia, child mortality declines while adult mortality stagnates. Both countries then experience significant increases in the risks of dying during adulthood while child mortality stagnates in Namibia and increases in Zimbabwe. Rates in Lesotho follow a similar trajectory, although the levels of child mortality are somewhat higher. Probably as a result of the later peak in HIV incidence in Southern Africa, the populations in this region fail to show declines in adult mortality rates similar to those observed in much of East Africa.

It is evident that sub-Saharan Africa will fall far behind several of the targets of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) set in 2000. One of the most prominent MDGs calls for countries to reduce their 1990 under-5 mortality rate by 67 percent by 2015. Despite impressive improvements in child survival in such countries as Madagascar and Liberia, only a few sub-Saharan countries are currently on track to achieve that goal. Their lack of progress is partly explained by the stagnation of child mortality rates during the late 1980s and the 1990s. Evidence from Senegal indicates that setbacks cannot be attributed to the impact of the HIV epidemic alone. Declines in rates of immunization and increases in malaria-related mortality, owing to the emergence of chloroquine-resistant strains of the parasite causing the disease, also played a major role. More encouraging is the recent accelerated decline in under-5 mortality in several countries, including Tanzania, Uganda, Kenya, and Senegal. Renewed efforts to increase the distribution of vaccines are undoubtedly amongst the driving forces behind this acceleration, together with the expansion of programs distributing bed-nets treated with insecticide, the progress in the provision of vitamin A supplements, and the rapid spread of measures to prevent the transmission of HIV from mothers to their children.

Adult mortality trends in sub-Saharan Africa have followed trajectories that have largely been disconnected from trends in child mortality, at least from the late 1980s onwards. In only a handful of countries, such as Madagascar, Senegal, and Ethiopia, have trends in 45q15 even approximately followed the path of the prevailing under-5 mortality rates. In other countries, adult mortality has either stagnated, sometimes at relatively high levels, as in the Democratic Republic of Congo and Burkina Faso, or has risen dramatically since the 1990s. AIDS mortality dominates many of the all-cause mortality patterns, but the first indications of a decline in adult mortality have emerged in East Africa, in some instances in advance of the large-scale expansion of ART programs in 2005.
Feeney, G. 2001. The impact of HIV/AIDS on adult mortality in Zimbabwe, Population and Development Review 27(4): 771–780.

Flaxman, A., N. Fullman, M. Otten, M. Menon, R. Cibulskis, M. Ng, C. Murray, and S. Lim. 2010. Rapid scaling up of insecticide-treated bed net coverage in Africa and its relationship with development assistance for health: a systematic synthesis of supply, distribution, and household survey data, PLoS Medicine 7(8): e1000328.

Gregson, S., T. Zhuwau, R. Anderson, and S. Chandi-wana. 1998. Is there evidence for behaviour change in response to AIDS in rural Zimbabwe? Social Science and Medicine 46(3): 321–30.

Hastie, T., and R. Tibshirani. 1986. Generalized additive models, Statistical Science 1(3): 297–310.

Helleringer, S., G. Pison, M. Kanté, G. Duthé, and A. Andro. Forthcoming. Reporting errors in siblings’ survival histories and their impact on adult mortality estimates: Results from a record linkage study in Senegal, Demography.

Hill, A. 1993. Trends in childhood mortality, in K. Foote, K. Hill, and L. Martin (eds.), Demographic Change in Sub-Saharan Africa. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, pp. 153–217.

Hill, K., and M. Figueroa. 2001. Child mortality estimation by time since first birth, in B. Zaba and J. Blacker (eds.), Brass Tacks: Essays in Medical Demography. London: Athlone Press, pp. 9–19.

Hill, K., D. You, M. Inoue, M. Oestergaard, and Technical Advisory Group of the UN-IGME. 2012. Child mortality estimation: accelerated progress in reducing global child mortality, 1990–2010, PLoS Medicine 9(8): e1001303.

Hogan, M., K. Foreman, M. Naghavi, S. Ahn, M. Wang, S. Makela, A. Lopez, R. Lozano, and C. Murray. 2010. Maternal mortality for 181 countries, 1980–2008: a systematic analysis of progress towards Millennium Development Goal 5, The Lancet 375(9726): 1609–23.

Human Mortality Database. 2012. University of California, Berkeley (USA), and Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research (Germany).

INDEPTH Network. 2004. INDEPTH Model Life Tables for Sub-Saharan Africa. London: Ashgate.

Johnson, K., S. Rutstein, and P. Govindasamy. 2005. The Stall in Mortality Decline in Ghana: Further Analysis of Demographic and Health Surveys Data. Calverton, MD: ORC Macro.

Johnston, S., S. Mendis, and C. Mathers. 2009. Global variation in stroke burden and mortality: estimates from monitoring, surveillance, and modelling, The Lancet Neurology 8(4): 345–354.

Lozano, R., H. Wang, K. Foreman, J. Rajaratnam, M. Naghavi, J. Marcus, L. Dwyer-Lindgren, K. Lofgren, D. Phillips, C. Atkinson, A. Lopez, and C. Murray. 2011. Progress towards Millennium development goals 4 and 5 on maternal and child mortality: an updated systematic analysis, The Lancet 378(9797): 1139–1165.