Income inequality and population health: An analysis of panel data for 21 developed countries, 1975–2006
Roberta Torre and Mikko Myrskylä
Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research
The relative income–health hypothesis postulates that income distribution is an important determinant of population health, but the age and sex patterns of this association are not well known. We tested the relative income–health hypothesis using panel data collected for 21 developed countries over 30 years. Net of trends in gross domestic product per head and unobserved period and country factors, income inequality measured by the Gini index is positively associated with the mortality of males and females at ages 1–14 and 15–49, and with the mortality of females at ages 65–89 albeit less strongly than for the younger age groups. These findings suggest that policies to decrease income inequality may improve health, especially that of children and young-to-middle-aged men and women. The mechanisms behind the income inequality–mortality association remain unknown and should be the focus of future research.
Keywords: income inequality; population health; mortality rate; panel data; developed countries

Introduction
The income inequality–health hypothesis postulates that population health and mortality are influenced by income distribution. If supported by data, the hypothesis might help to explain why developed countries with high levels of income per head still show large differences in population health, and would also justify redistributive policies aimed at decreasing income inequality. Existing research, however, is inconclusive, possibly because the associations differ by population subgroup. The aim of the study reported in this paper was to investigate the income inequality–mortality association with a focus on sex and age differences in the association.
With some exceptions, most recent research has been supportive of the income inequality–health hypothesis. However, much of the research on income inequality and mortality has been at community and individual levels. We chose to study the income inequality–mortality link at the population level because income inequality is by definition a property of the population and not of the individual; and because by studying the link at the population level we were able to take into account social and environmental factors behind the association.
We tested the income inequality–health hypothesis using a set of panel data collected over the years 1975–2006 for 21 developed countries. We used mortality as the measure of population health and the high-quality Human Mortality Database as the data source. The source for the Gini index of income inequality, our income inequality measure, was the World Income Inequality Database (WIID) maintained by the United Nations University–World Institute for Development Economics Research (UNU-WIDER). In contrast to prior work that analysed the population-level association between income inequality and mortality, we focused on developed countries only and distinguished between men and women and between age groups. Our analysis controlled for trends in gross domestic product (GDP) per head and unobserved period and country factors.
The main advantage of using a panel-data analysis was that it allowed us to control for all shared period factors and time-invariant country-specific factors. This has the important advantage over cross-sectional work that the results are not confounded by unobserved country heterogeneity. In addition, using our panel data, we were able to control for shared period factors, which otherwise could have been confounders, particularly in those analyses in which only a few time points were used. Although there may be yet other confounders beyond those we controlled for, such as unobserved time-varying processes not captured by trends in GDP per head, the panel-data procedure still presents an important step forward in addressing potential causality.
Our results suggest that an increase in income inequality increases the mortality of males and females at ages 1–14 and 15–49, and the mortality of women at ages 65–89. These age-specific mortality effects yield observable associations between income inequality and life expectancy at birth. The effects are strongest for children and young-to-middle-aged men, and suggest that redistributive policies intended to decrease income inequality could decrease mortality among these populations.
Countries only and distinguished between men and women and between age groups. Our analysis controlled for trends in gross domestic product (GDP) per head and unobserved period and country factors. The main advantage of using a panel-data analysis was that it allowed us to control for all shared period factors and time-invariant country-specific factors. This has the important advantage over cross-sectional work that the results are not confounded by unobserved country heterogeneity. In addition, using our panel data, we were able to control for shared period factors, which otherwise could have been confounders, particularly in those analyses in which only a few time points were used. Although there may be yet other confounders beyond those we controlled for, such as unobserved time-varying processes not captured by trends in GDP per head, the panel-data procedure still presents an important step forward in addressing potential causality. 

Our results suggest that an increase in income inequality increases the mortality of males and females at ages 1–14 and 15–49, and the mortality of women at ages 65–89. These age-specific mortality effects yield observable associations between income inequality and life expectancy at birth. The effects are strongest for children and young-to-middle-aged men and suggest that redistributive policies intended to decrease income inequality could decrease mortality among these populations. 

Previous research at the population level has indicated that while most recent research finds an association between income inequality and health measures, especially at the individual level, the nature, magnitude, and characteristics of the association at the population level between income inequality and health are not well understood. We focus only on studies comparable to ours, and therefore only on those studies carried out at the population level. In an extensive review, out of 45 cross-country studies, 30 are supportive of the income inequality–health hypothesis but 6 do not find any evidence for it. The results were most consistent for infant mortality, but less so for adult mortality.

Several studies have pooled together data from less developed and developed countries or performed only a cross-sectional analysis that failed to control for country-specific characteristics such as welfare systems. Some of these studies found evidence for an association between income inequality and health. However, studies that focused on more homogeneous countries or that used panel-data methods to account for unobserved heterogeneity often did not find clear support for the income inequality–health hypothesis. Moreover, early studies did not find the correlation between income inequality and health to differ between men and women. More recent studies find evidence that the association is stronger for women, which is at odds with findings that women’s mortality is less sensitive to deprivation than that of men.

Data and methods
For our study, we used absolute inequality measures to test the income inequality–health hypothesis. To analyze how mortality and life expectancy were associated with income inequality in developed nations we adopted a study design similar to that used by Shkolnikov et al. They used a country fixed-effects method and quinquennial time series to analyze the association between income inequality and variation in the age at death. We performed a panel-data analysis of age-specific mortality using fixed-effects models with data on 21 developed countries for an annual time series spanning more than 30 years, controlling for serial correlation. When selecting countries we were careful to avoid problems suspected of being the principal weaknesses of previous studies. Thus, we restricted the choice to economically developed countries and excluded countries that were part of the Soviet Bloc because of their idiosyncratic mortality trajectories following the collapse of the Soviet Union. For a list of countries included and length of the time series, please refer to the Appendix.

Response variables: life expectancy and mortality rates by age
We used data from the Human Mortality Database (HMD). The HMD provides internationally comparable data on mortality for national populations over long periods of time. We used life expectancy at birth and age-specific mortality rates as our response variables. Life expectancy at birth summarizes the mortality experience of a synthetic cohort over the life course, thus being a concise measure of population health. The use of this measure also allows comparisons with existing research, because it has been used as the dependent variable in other comparable studies.

Independent variables: the Gini coefficient and gross domestic product (GDP) per head
As the key independent variable, income inequality, we used the Gini index of income inequality. Data for the Gini coefficient are taken from UNU-WIDER WIID. The coefficient is a measure of how equally income is distributed across the population. We used data on the Gini coefficient only for countries in which the income-sharing unit was the household, ‘income’ referred to disposable income, and the unit of analysis was the person. After exclusions, we had time series data for 21 countries spanning the years 1975–2006. 

Following Shkolnikov et al., we dealt with missing observations by simple linear interpolation. Because the Gini index evolves slowly over time, jumps and short-term fluctuations in the index are likely to be caused by measurement error rather than by changes in the true income inequality. We therefore applied a locally weighted (lowess) regression to smooth the time series that otherwise would have shown irregular variations across time.

Our models controlled for income per head. Data for GDP per head in US dollars (at constant prices and parity purchasing power, reference year 2000) were collected from the OECD database, except for Taiwan (OECD 2008). For the latter, data were obtained in the same units from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) website (World Economic Outlook Database 2008). 

Methods
The data set was a time series of observations with measurements made annually. The analysis was conducted using Stata version 10. We used fixed-effects regression methods with controls for both unobserved country heterogeneity and shared time trends to estimate the association between income inequality and the dependent variable (life expectancy or mortality rate). Before the regression analysis, we took logs of the income inequality and the life expectancy/mortality variables to allow for easier interpretation and comparison of the size of the estimated coefficients, and to control for heteroscedasticity and achieve linearity. 

We used panel-data regression techniques to estimate the effect of income inequality on mortality. The regressions controlled for GDP per head, and fixed effects by country and time. The fixed effects by country controlled for unobserved factors that differed between countries but were constant over time for each country (e.g., welfare systems, geographic, and environmental differences). The time-fixed effects controlled for unobserved factors shared by all countries at a specific point in time that were not accounted for by GDP per head. In addition, we adjusted the model to account for autocorrelation.
The Gini coefficient measures income inequality and ranges between 0 and 1: the closer the coefficient is to 1, the higher the degree of inequality. The advantage of using the Gini coefficient is that data are relatively easily available. The literature suggests that the association between income inequality and mortality is robust to the choice of the income inequality measure (Kawachi and Kennedy 1997).

We used data on the Gini coefficient only for countries in which the income-sharing unit was the household, 'income' referred to disposable income, and the unit of analysis was the person. Of all OECD countries for which data were available from the UNU-WIDER database, we excluded Australia from the analysis because the data referred to a person instead of a household as the income-sharing unit. We also excluded Japan because the Gini data suggested surprising fluctuations and a falling trend over time, which was not consistent with published findings (Jones 2007). After these exclusions, we had time series data for 21 countries spanning the years 1975–2006.

Following Shkolnikov et al. (2009), we dealt with missing observations by simple linear interpolation. Because the Gini index evolves slowly over time, jumps and short-term fluctuations in the index are likely to be caused by measurement error rather than by changes in the true income inequality. We therefore applied a locally weighted (lowess) regression to smooth the time series that otherwise would have shown irregular variations across time (Solt 2009).

Our models controlled for income per head. Data for GDP per head in US dollars (at constant prices and parity purchasing power, reference year 2000) were collected from the OECD database, except for Taiwan (OECD 2008). For the latter, data were obtained in the same units from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) website (World Economic Outlook Database 2008).

Methods
The data set was a time series of observations with measurements made annually. The analysis was conducted using Stata version 10. We used fixed-effects regression methods with controls for both unobserved country heterogeneity and shared time trends to estimate the association between income inequality and the dependent variable (life expectancy or mortality rate). Before the regression analysis, we took logs of the income inequality and the life expectancy/mortality variables to allow for easier interpretation and comparison of the size of the estimated coefficients and to control for heteroscedasticity and achieve linearity.

We used panel-data regression techniques to estimate the effect of income inequality on mortality. The regressions controlled for GDP per head, and fixed effects by country and time. The fixed effects by country controlled for unobserved factors that differed between countries but were constant over time for each country (e.g., welfare systems, geographic, and environmental differences). The time-fixed effects controlled for unobserved factors shared by all countries at a specific point in time that were not accounted for by GDP per head. In addition, we adjusted the model to account for autocorrelation. The following equation shows the regression model:

\[ In Y_{it} = a + b_1 In GDP_{it} + b_2 In Gini_{it} + \tau_i + \gamma_t + \epsilon_{it} \]

with \[ \epsilon_{it} = q \epsilon_{it-1} + g_{it} \]

where Y denotes the dependent variable (life expectancy at birth or age-specific mortality rate) for country i at time t; GDP is the control variable for income per head of country i at time t; Gini is the index of income inequality for country i at time t and represents the main explanatory variable; \(\tau_i\) is the country heterogeneity term that is constant over time; \(\gamma_t\) is a period dummy capturing time-fixed effects (5-year intervals starting from 1975 with the exception of 2000–06, for which the interval was 7 years long); and \(\epsilon_{it}\) is the error term which we allowed to be serially correlated (AR(1) structure).
Rates for males are approximately twice that of females. Table 2 shows bivariate correlations for the main variables. The Gini coefficient is negatively correlated with life expectancy at birth (significant for men, not for women) and positively correlated with mortality rate for both men and women up to age 50. At ages 50–64, the correlation becomes insignificant and at ages 65–89 changes sign and is negatively correlated with mortality. Overall, the bivariate correlations suggest that a higher level of income inequality is linked to lower life expectancy at birth and higher mortality rates below age 50. For GDP per head, the results are similar for men and women, and suggest that higher average income is associated with increased life expectancy and decreased mortality in all age groups.

Regression results Table 3 reports the results of the regressions of life expectancy and age-specific mortality on the Gini coefficient. All models control for GDP per head, and fixed effects for country and time, and allow for autocorrelation in the residuals. Figure 1 illustrates the key results shown in Table 3.

Table 3 presents the estimates for the twelve models used (six response variables, two sexes). Each row shows the estimates for one response variable, with results reported separately for men and for women. Each column shows the explanatory variables introduced in a model. The first row shows the association between life expectancy at birth, Gini coefficient, and GDP per head. For both men and women, the Gini coefficient has a negative sign and is statistically significant, suggesting that there is an inverse relation between income inequality and life expectancy. The control variable GDP per head is strongly associated with life expectancy, and the association is in the opposite direction to that of income inequality. The association is also markedly stronger than that of income inequality.

Other rows in Table 3 show results from regression models with age-specific mortality rates regressed on the Gini index and GDP per head. We do not observe a statistically significant association between income inequality and infant mortality for either men or women. For men, we observe positive and significant coefficients for the Gini index from age 1 up to age 49. Above this age, the coefficients are small, negative, and statistically insignificant. For women, the coefficients are positive at ages 1–49 and at old ages, 65–89. For the control variable GDP per head, we observe both among men and women a consistently negative and significant association with all age-specific mortality rates.

At ages 15–49, the mortality coefficient for males for the Gini index is still positive (0.252) and significant (p < 0.05). For women aged 15–49 the coefficient is much smaller (0.145). At old ages (65–89), the income inequality–mortality association is significant only for women. Robustness checks We confirmed that the results were robust to the exclusion of single countries (i.e., the exclusion from the model of each country in turn).

Discussion Rodgers (1979) and Wilkinson (1992) were among the first to provide evidence for the negative association between income inequality and population health, but the association has not been confirmed by some recent research that used longitudinal data (Mellor and Milyo 2001; Beckfield 2004). Our results suggest that income inequality matters more at younger ages so that the association between income inequality and mortality is strongest for children aged 1–14 and young adults aged 15–49. We were unable to confirm a positive association between income inequality and infant mortality.
The coefficient is slightly larger, but because child mortality is higher for men than for women, the absolute effect is slightly smaller than that for men. The UK’s experience is an illuminating example of the effect of an increase in the Gini index: a 43 per cent increase in income inequality, which was observed in the UK over the period 1975–2006, would correspond to a 10.6 per cent increase in child mortality for boys and a 12.6 per cent increase for girls. However, since the mortality rate at ages 1–14 is lower for women than for men (in our data, on average 25 per cent lower), the absolute effect is greater for men.

At ages 15–49, the mortality coefficient for males for the Gini index is still positive (0.252) and significant (p < 0.05). For women aged 15–49, the coefficient is much smaller (0.145). Again, the UK’s experience is a useful example: a 43 per cent increase in the Gini index would correspond to a 9.4 per cent increase in the mortality of males. For men, the average mortality rate in the data is 1.9/1,000 at ages 15–49, and a 9.4 per cent increase would take it to 2.1/1,000. Given the UK’s population size and age structure (around 15 million men and women aged between 15 and 49 years), these mortality changes would correspond to approximately 2,700 excess deaths of males and 700 excess deaths of females at ages 15–49. Conversely, if the Gini coefficient declined from 30 per cent (the average in our data) to 20 per cent (the minimum in our data) for this population, a decrease of 33 per cent, with baseline mortality rates corresponding to the average in our sample, the number of lives saved in the age range 15–49 would be approximately 2,900 for men and 800 for women.

At old ages (65–89), the income inequality–mortality association is significant only for women. The coefficient 0.149 implies that an increase of 43 per cent in income inequality is associated with a 5.5 per cent increase in mortality. While significant, this increase is markedly smaller than the increases observed at ages 1–14 for both sexes, or for men at ages 15–49.

We confirmed that the results were robust to the exclusion of single countries (i.e., the exclusion from the model of each country in turn). By re-estimating the models without time controls, we also confirmed that the inclusion of time-fixed effects influenced the results only marginally. We tested an alternative, more parsimonious specification of the time control by using a linear shared trend, and found that the key results did not change. Finally, we estimated the models with income inequality lagged by one year. The results did not change in any significant manner.

Rodgers (1979) and Wilkinson (1992) were among the first to provide evidence for the negative association between income inequality and population health, but the association has not been confirmed by some recent research that used longitudinal data. Recently, Shkolnikov et al. (2009) used longitudinal data to analyze the association between income inequality and variation in age at death and found that income inequality explained inter-country but not within-country differences. We analyzed the association between income inequality and mortality by sex in 21 developed countries for the period 1975–2006 and found income inequality to be an important predictor of the mortality of males and females at ages 1–14 and 15–49, and of mortality of females at ages 65–89. These results shed new light on the income inequality–health hypothesis. They differ from several earlier results, possibly because we focused only on developed countries, excluded transition economies, used panel-data models which allow controlling for unobserved country effects, and measured the effects separately for males and females and for different age groups.
In summary, our results show that in developed countries, income inequality has an important effect on child and adult mortality and that there are sex differences for adults. The importance of average income, however, is greater than that of income distribution. Our results suggest that recent skepticism (Gravelle et al. 2002; Lynch and Smith 2002) about the income inequality–health hypothesis needs to be reconsidered. While our population-level analysis cannot disentangle the factors underlying the concave association between income and individual health, it shows that mortality among children and young adults is lower in societies where income distribution is relatively equal than in those in which it is unequal. Moreover, income distribution is associated more closely with the mortality of young adult males than with that of females—an interesting sex difference worthy of further study. Given the importance of health for productivity as well as the sustainability of an ageing society, redistributive policies aimed at reducing income inequality might yield generally benign social effects in addition to improved population health.
Pampel, F. C., and C. Zimmer. 1989. Female labour force activity and the sex differential in mortality: comparisons across developed nations, 1950–1980, European Journal of Population/Revue européenne de Démographie 5(3): 281–304. doi:10.1007/BF01796820

Pickett, K. E., and R. G. Wilkinson. 2007. Child wellbeing and income inequality in rich societies: ecological cross sectional study, British Medical Journal 335(7629): 1080. doi:10.1136/bmj.39377.580162.55

Raleigh, V., and V. Kiri. 1997. Life expectancy in England: variations and trends by gender, health authority, and level of deprivation, Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 51: 649–658. doi:10.1136/jech.51.6.649

Ram, R. 2006. Further examination of the cross-country association between income inequality and population health, Social Science & Medicine 62(3): 779–791. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2005.06.034

Regidor, E., M. E. Calle, P. Navarro, and V. Dominguez. 2003. Trends in the association between average income, poverty and income inequality and life expectancy in Spain, Social Science and Medicine 56, 961–971. doi:10.1016/S0277-9536(02)00107-7

Rodgers, G. B. 1979. Income and inequality as determinants of mortality: an international cross-section analysis, Population Studies 33(2): 343–351.

Shkolnikov, V., E. M. Andreev, Z. Zhang, J. Oeppen, and J. W. Vaupel. 2009. Losses of expected lifetime in the US and other developed countries: methods and empirical analyses, Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research Working Paper. Rostock: Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research.

Shmueli, A. 2004. Population health and income inequality: new evidence from Israeli time-series analysis, International Journal of Epidemiology 33(2): 311–317. doi:10.1093/ije/dyh035

Solt, Frederick. 2009. Standardizing the world income inequality database, Social Science Quarterly 90:231–242. doi:10.1111/j.1540-6237.2009.00614.x

Stuckler, D., L. King, and M. McKee. 2009. Mass privatisation and the post-communist mortality crisis: a cross-national analysis, Lancet 373(9661): 399–407. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60005-2

UNU-WIDER World Income Inequality Database, Version 2.0c. 2008. United Nations University-World Institute for Development Economics Research. Available http://www.wider.unu.edu/research/Database/en_GB/database/

Wagstaff, A., and E. van Doorslaer. 2000. Income inequality and health: what does the literature tell us?, Annual Review of Public Health 21: 543–567. doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.21.1.543

Waldmann, R. J. 1992. Income distribution and infant mortality, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(4): 1283–1302. doi:10.2307/2118389

Wennemo, I. 1993. Infant mortality, public policy and inequality: a comparison of 18 industrialised countries 1950–85, Sociology of Health & Illness 15(4): 429–446. doi:10.1111/1467-9566.ep11372773

Wilkinson, R. G. 1992. Income distribution and life expectancy, British Medical Journal 304(6820): 165–168. doi:10.1136/bmj.304.6820.165

Wilkinson, R. G. 1999. Two pathways, but how much do they diverge?, British Medical Journal 319(7215): 956–957.

Wilkinson, R. G., and K. E. Pickett. 2006. Income inequality and population health: a review and explanation of the evidence, Social Science & Medicine 62(7): 1768–1784. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2005.08.036

Wilkinson, R. G., and K. E. Pickett. 2009. Income inequality and social dysfunction, Annual Review of Sociology 35(1): 493–511. doi:10.1146/annurev-soc-070308-115926

Wilson, M., M. Daly, and N. Pound. 2002. An evolutionary psychological perspective on the modulation of competitive confrontation and risk taking, Hormones, Brain and Behavior 5: 381–408.

Wolfson, M., G. Kaplan, J. Lynch, N. Ross, E. Backlund, H. Gravelle, and R. G. Wilkinson. 1999. Relation between income inequality and mortality: empirical demonstration, diminishing returns to aggregate level studies, two pathways, but how much do they diverge?, British Medical Journal 319(7215): 953–957. doi:10.1136/bmj.319.7215.953

Wooldridge, J. 2001. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

World Economic Outlook Database. 2008. International Monetary Fund. Available https://www.imf.org/external/ns/cs.aspx?id=28