Population Studies
A Journal of Demography

Multigenerational Transmission of Family Size in Contemporary Sweden
Martin Kolk
Stockholm University

The study of the intergenerational transmission of fertility has a long history in demography, but until now research has focused primarily on parents’ influence on their children’s fertility patterns and has largely overlooked the possible influence of other kin. This study examines the transmission of fertility patterns from parents, grandparents, uncles, and aunts, using event history models to determine the risk of first, second, and third births. Swedish register data are used to study the 1970-82 birth cohorts. The findings indicate strong associations between the fertility of index persons and that of their parents, and also independent associations between the completed fertility of index persons and that of their grandparents and parents’ siblings. The results suggest that, when examining background effects in fertility research, it is relevant to take a multigenerational perspective and to consider the characteristics of extended kin.

Keywords: intergenerational transmission; multigenerational demography; kinship; fertility; grandparents; Sweden

Introduction
The study of the intergenerational transmission of family size from parents to offspring has a long history in demography, but the influence of extended kin remains virtually unexplored. If it exists, the transmission of family size from grandparents and parents’ siblings would constitute a multigenerational transmission of norms and values, and have a persistent structural effect on the size of the extended family, and thus on the number of siblings, aunts, uncles, and cousins with whom a person interacts. The purpose of the study presented here was to investigate this form of multigenerational transmission in Sweden.

Research consistently shows modest, but consistent, effects of the intergenerational transmission of fertility pattern from parents to their children, but the effect of the fertility patterns of other kin members is virtually unexplored. Previous studies involving kinship networks have primarily been concerned with how they have been shaped by changing fertility and mortality patterns. So far, no study has concentrated on the intergenerational transmission of fertility pattern over more than one generation, but it is important to go beyond one generation if one wants to understand and forecast compositional changes over time in traits such as education or ethnicity. Compositional changes also have implications for the size and structure of kinship networks. Identifying strong continuities in fertility pattern across generations might also be important for understanding the social role of kin and which kin may have influence on other traits.

Sweden has long-term stable patterns of cohort fertility, high social mobility, and unparalleled longitudinal demographic registers, and together these factors offer favourable conditions for examining multigenerational continuities in fertility. In a study of kinship in Sweden, informants reported comparable, and often larger, kinship networks than had been found by studies in the USA and the UK.

Our study used Swedish administrative register data on the total population for cohorts born between 1970 and 1982. Event history analysis was employed to evaluate the transitions to the first, second, and third births in order to determine how the completed fertility of various kin had affected the fertility of men and women in contemporary Sweden. The specific goals of the study were to establish answers to the following questions about the transmission of fertility pattern in contemporary Sweden: is the fertility of young individuals associated with the completed fertility of their grandparents and their parents’ siblings independently of their parents’ completed fertility? If the association exists, does it differ in strength between men and women, between matrilineal and patrilineal kin, and between female and male extended kin?

As will be shown below, the results reveal a modest effect of the grandparents and parents’ siblings’ fertility that is independent of the parents’ fertility. A potential explanation of the phenomenon is the size of the kinship network—a consequence of the completed fertility of previous generations—experienced by the individual in the process of socialization. The direct transmission of values from extended kin probably also plays a role.

The term ‘kin’ is used throughout the paper to refer to parents, parents’ siblings, and grandparents. The term ‘extended kin’ is used to refer to parents’ siblings and grandparents. Kin and extended kin were the relatives of members of the study population, which comprised women and men born between 1970 and 1982.

Our study used Swedish administrative register data on the total population for cohorts born between 1970 and 1982. Event history analysis was employed to evaluate the transitions to the first, second, and third births in order to determine how the completed fertility of various kin had affected the fertility of men and women in contemporary Sweden. The specific goals of the study were to establish answers to the following questions about the transmission of fertility pattern in contemporary Sweden: is the fertility of young individuals associated with the completed fertility of their grandparents and their parents’ siblings independently of their parents’ completed fertility? If the association exists, does it differ in strength between men and women, between matrilineal and patrilineal kin, and between female and male extended kin?

The results reveal a modest effect of the grandparents and parents’ siblings' fertility that is independent of the parents' fertility. A potential explanation of the phenomenon is the size of the kinship network—a consequence of the completed fertility of previous generations—experienced by the individual in the process of socialization. The direct transmission of values from extended kin probably also plays a role.

The term ‘kin’ is used throughout the paper to refer to parents, parents’ siblings, and grandparents. The term ‘extended kin’ is used to refer to parents’ siblings and grandparents. Kin and extended kin were the relatives of members of the study population, which comprised women and men born between 1970 and 1982.

The structure of the paper is as follows. We start with a discussion of the theoretical perspectives of multigenerational demography, focusing on research on the intergenerational transmission of fertility, multigenerational associations, and kinship and extended families. This is followed by a review of possible pathways of multigenerational associations, an overview of demographic trends in Sweden, and a description of the data and methods used in the study. Finally, the results are presented and discussed.

Research has shown that, in general, the correlation between generations has become larger in recent decades. Studies of the transmission of fertility in historical periods, before the fertility transition, show mixed results, with some finding evidence of intergenerational transmission and others finding none or very weak transmission. Intergenerational continuity in family size, as measured by Pearson correlation coefficients between the completed fertility of children and that of their parents, generally varies between 0.1 and 0.2 for post-transitional populations, and is somewhat smaller for less developed countries. Continuity in the timing of first birth and marriage seems to be greater. Mother-daughter associations are larger than father-son associations in most studies.

Researchers have suggested several factors that could be associated with the existence and magnitude of the intergenerational transmission of fertility. These include the gender of children and parents, birth order of the younger generation, continuities in lifestyle across the generations, and satisfaction with family of upbringing. Some studies have suggested that childhood satisfaction plays a role. Birth order and continuity in family size have been studied in a wide variety of settings, with mixed results.

The intergenerational transmission of family size can occur by one or more of the following mechanisms: childhood socialization, continuities in socio-economic status, and genetic factors. Most previous research has assumed that childhood socialization is the principal mechanism. Children growing up in small or large families are socialized into values and norms that they are likely to replicate in their own families. These norms can be directly associated with fertility, such as views on ideal family size or when to form a family, but could also be related to broader cultural, ethnic, and religious patterns that indirectly affect fertility. Another plausible explanation for a continuity in completed fertility is the intergenerational transmission of socio-economic characteristics associated with fertility. Traits like education, occupation, and income have been shown to affect fertility. Many socio-economic characteristics affect the likelihood of having children, and if these characteristics are transmitted between generations, the associated opportunities for or impediments to fertility are transmitted, as well.

Previous research on intergenerational fertility provides equivocal support for multigenerational continuities in fertility that are independent of associations between the parent-child dyad. Nevertheless, we expected to find continuities in our study and we embodied this expectation in our first hypothesis:
H1: There is a modest independent association between the fertility of the index generation and that of the completed fertility of grandparents and parental siblings, even after controlling for the completed fertility of the index person’s parents.

Because research on kinship has repeatedly found that kin relationships are more important to women than men, our second hypothesis was:
H2: Multigenerational fertility associations are larger for women, female kin, and matrilineally related kin, than for men, male kin, and patrilineally related kin, respectively.
That fertility is affected by heritable genetic factors (Kirk et al. 2001; Rodgers et al. 2001) has been argued to be due to the heritability of behavior affecting fertility (such as age of first union or contraceptive use) rather than to the inheritability of fecundity. It is possible that the genetic heritability of other characteristics associated with fertility (such as health, appearance, or socio-economic status) could also be a mechanism. Sociological research on extended kin in developed countries has found consistent evidence that kinship is of more concern to women than to men (Schneider and Cottrell 1975; Rossi and Rossi 1990). The mother-daughter relationship has been described as the strongest tie in the Western kinship system (Young and Willmott 1957; Hagestad 1986). Both men and women report closer ties to their mothers, grandmothers, and maternal kin than to their fathers, grandfathers, and paternal kin. This finding has emerged from studies of frequency of contacts between kin members, kinship and emotional closeness, help from kin to mothers with childrearing, acceptance of normative obligations for the welfare of kin members, and intergenerational transfers. In previous research on closeness to grandparents, people report maternal grandmothers as closer than maternal grandfathers, maternal grandfathers as closer than paternal grandmothers, and paternal grandmothers as closer than paternal grandfathers. Because women live longer and marry younger than men, female and maternal kin are also younger on average and more likely to be alive than male and paternal kin.

In their examination of the kinship system in the USA in the 1960s and 1970s, Schneider and Cottrell (1975) and Schneider and Smith (1978) found that people had more self-reported female and maternally related kin. Some researchers have shown that bonds between kin of the same sex should be stronger than opposite-sex bonds, but this finding has only weak support from other studies. There has been less research on relationships with parents' siblings than with grandparents, but two studies suggest a similar, female-centred pattern, favouring aunts and matrilineal kin. An evolutionary-oriented literature on parental investment suggests that paternity uncertainty in father-child relationships can explain why paternal kin are less close than maternal kin.

Previous research on intergenerational fertility provides equivocal support for multigenerational continuities in fertility that are independent of associations between the parent-child dyad. Nevertheless, we expected to find the continuities in our study and we embodied this expectation in our first hypothesis:

H1: There is a modest independent association between the fertility of the index generation and that of the completed fertility of grandparents and parental siblings, even after controlling for the completed fertility of the index person’s parents.

Because research on kinship has repeatedly found that kin relationships are more important to women than men, our second hypothesis was:

H2: Multigenerational fertility associations are larger for women, female kin, and matrilineally related kin, than for men, male kin, and patrilineally related kin, respectively.

Demographic developments and intergenerational relations in Sweden have shown that most studies of the intergenerational transmission of fertility have had to use measures of relative fertility because of changes in completed fertility between generations. Our study did not have this constraint because Swedish cohort fertility remained almost constant between 1900 and the present despite large fluctuations in period fertility, and thus variation between the completed fertility of generations has been low. Variance in Swedish fertility declined for most of the century but has been increasing modestly for cohorts born after 1950. The mean age at first birth has been relatively stable, becoming slightly younger during the first half of the century but becoming older again after the 1970s.

Geographical and urban-rural differences in fertility occurred historically in Sweden but largely disappeared in the second half of the twentieth century. Education and socio-economic status are associated with older age at first birth in Sweden and, to a much lesser degree, with completed fertility. Studies on the geographical proximity of children and old parents in Sweden have found that men and those with lower educational attainment live closer to their kin than do women and those with higher educational attainment.

Swedish family life is commonly described as being at the forefront of the development toward individualism that is said to be at the core of the Second Demographic Transition. It is a 'welfare state' with high gender equality. Childcare is heavily subsidized by the government. Social mobility is comparatively fluid and the intergenerational persistence of socio-economic status is lower than in most developed countries. A large part of the care of the elderly is provided by state retirement schemes and government care services.
Completed fertility for parents, grandparents, aunts, and uncles was taken as the total number of children born in Sweden by the end of 2007, as recorded in the register. The number of natural children of the index person’s mother was included as a baseline variable for the fertility of the index person’s parents. The fertility of the father, as a covariate, was also included when the numbers of children of the father and the mother differed. For grandparents’ families, only grandmothers' completed fertility was included in the models. Because union stability was high in Sweden before the 1960s, this was an acceptable approximation of grandfathers’ fertility. To calculate a variable for the family size of parental siblings, four different variables for maternal/paternal aunts and uncles were created. Because subjects can have several (or no) maternal/paternal aunts and uncles, the average number of children within each of these four categories of parental siblings was used (rounded down to the nearest whole integer).

There are some data issues concerning the creation of digitized population registries in Sweden. The registries were created using administrative data from registers for 1947, when all individuals in Sweden were given a unique personal identity number. Data were collected for both parents and resident children aged under 16 in 1947. Therefore, starting with births in 1932, it is possible to link children to their parents using the 1947 data. For births after 1947, digitized birth records have to be used. For a small number of individuals born in the early 1970s, data on their parents are missing in the registers and they were excluded from the index population. Swedish register data were digitized using data from 1961, so that individuals needed to be registered in Sweden from 1960 onwards in order to be included in the register. Given that the index population was born after 1970, the requirement for the parents to be alive until 1960 was not a problem. For grandparents, the requirement to be alive and registered after 1960 means that information on grandparents and parental siblings are missing from the registers if the grandparent died before 1960. There were also selection issues for the fertility of the parents’ siblings. If a parent was younger than most of his or her siblings, and the parents were born in the 1930s, there was a risk that some siblings had been born before 1932, so that their birth records were therefore missing from the register. This means that the grandparents’ fertility was under-estimated and that some aunts/uncles might have been missing from the data. If the parents' siblings were missing randomly, the true transmission of completed fertility from grandparents would have been underestimated. If an extended family member was missing, the index person was still included, and the variable for kin-completed fertility was replaced by a missing category.

An overview of the intergenerational transmission of fertility for the index population, using correlation coefficients and other summary statistics is presented in Table 1, which gives the correlation in completed fertility for all categories of kin with that of the index population. The correlations for female index persons are comparable to those of earlier studies, and the smaller correlations for men with kin are most likely to be partly a result of the fact that they had not yet reached their ultimate fertility in 2007. Intergenerational continuity in fertility, as measured by the correlation between the fertility of the index population and that of their parents, is greater than the correlation between the fertility of their parents and that of their grandparents. Correlations between the age at first birth and completed fertility of kin for the 1970 cohort are also included in Table 1.
Table 1 Correlation (r) between number of children of kin and number of children of index persons, index women, and men born in Sweden 1970, and summary statistics on fertility of kin, Sweden 1970-82 birth cohorts
Ego
Mother
Father
Maternal grandmother
Paternal grandmother
Maternal aunt
Paternal aunt
Maternal uncle
Paternal uncle

Correlation between number of children of kin and number of children of index persons
Women*number of children at age 38
0.12
0.10
0.05
0.04
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.02

Men*number of children at age 38
0.05
0.03
0.04
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.04

Women*age at first birth
-0.17
-0.14
-0.10
-0.10
-0.05
-0.05
0.01
0.002

Men*age at first birth
-0.13
-0.12
-0.08
-0.08
-0.04
-0.03
0.012
0.002

Number of children of kin (for index persons born 1970-82)
Women*mean number of children (SD)
2.65 (1.06)
2.69 (1.14)
3.11 (1.68)
3.06 (1.68)
1.97 (1.08)
1.96 (1.08)
1.79 (1.17)
1.83 (1.15)

Men*mean number of children (SD)
2.60 (1.03)
2.65 (1.12)
3.10 (1.76)
3.00 (1.72)
1.99 (1.06)
1.98 (1.09)
1.82 (1.17)
1.86 (1.14)

Birth cohorts of kin (for index person born 1970-82)
Median
1976
1949
1947
1921
1918

25th percentile and
1973
1945
1943
1917
1912

75th percentile
1979
1950
1953
1927
1924

Full range
1970-1982
1932-1968
1932-1967
1885-1951
1885-1948

Source: Swedish register data.
The main results are presented for models for the transitions to first, second, and third births for both women and men. All models include identical controls for the following: age; time period (calendar year); educational level; birth order; birth intervals; grandmothers’ birth years; and, as the main explanatory variables, covariates of completed fertility of kin. The tables and figures show estimates of kin covariates only. The results are presented as graphs showing the effect on the transition to first birth and a table giving the main results for all parity progressions.

The main finding is that, at all parities, the risk of a subsequent birth is considerably and consistently affected by the transmission of parents’ fertility, and is independently associated with grandparents and siblings’ fertility. These results are consistent with the first hypothesis, framed to test the primary research question of the study. The associations are largest for the transitions to first birth, but the pattern is consistent across parities. The mother’s characteristics are the most important for the transition to first birth for both men and women, but there are also independent influences by each of the other categories of kin.

Generally, the observed relative risk shows a steady increase for each additional child of the kin member concerned. The effect of transmission appears to be slightly stronger when the completed fertility in the previous generation is large.

The extent of the intergenerational transmission of fertility differs according to the parity of the index generation. The largest association with kin is for the transition to the first birth, while the smallest is for the transition to the second. This is most probably related to the two-child norm in Sweden. Parental leave policy encourages short birth intervals and a uniform pattern of parity progression. For the transition to third birth, the influence of kin size is almost as strong as that for the transition to first birth. Large parental and grandparental family sizes appear to be related to earlier entry into parenthood, and continued childbearing after the second birth. 

There are different patterns by the sex of the index person. Women tend to have greater continuities of fertility with kin than men, but the fertility of men and women is generally equally affected by the completed fertility of different categories of kin. Kin influences show gendered patterns at different parities. For women, completed fertility of kin seems mostly to affect the risk of transition to parity one, with the relative contribution at higher parities being much smaller. Kin influence for men is more equally distributed across the parities and, in addition to that on first birth, kin influences on third birth are considerable.

The degree of continuity in fertility varies according to type of kin. The fertility of the mother has a large association with the risk of a birth at every parity, and for both sexes. A difference between father and mother in number of children is also associated with the fertility of the index person, though interpretation is difficult, given that such differences tend to be associated with union dissolution. There is a clear, and fairly strong, influence of grandparents’ completed fertility on the risk of a first birth, but the association is evident for every parity. Parents’ siblings’ fertility also has a consistent influence. Overall, the extent of the association with fertility of grandparents and aunts/uncles is similar.

In general, women’s fertility is influenced more by their grandparents’ fertility, while men’s fertility seems to be equally associated with that of their parents’ siblings and grandparents. Having childless aunts and uncles is negatively associated with becoming a parent, and ambiguously associated with continued childbearing.

When studying intergenerational fertility transmission, it is important to distinguish between maternal and paternal kin. There are reasons to believe that, for grandparents, both their direct influence by contact and their indirect influence through the socialization of the parent could differ significantly according to the sex of the parent. The results for kin by lineage show similar influences, though the influence of matrilineal kin is somewhat stronger than that of patrilineal kin. The type of kin shows similar patterns for both maternal and paternal lineages. The fertility of women is more strongly associated with the fertility of maternal than with paternal kin. For men, paternal and maternal kin have similar associations.

The sex of the parents’ siblings has a larger female kin bias, with the fertility of aunts being more influential than that of uncles. The sex of parents’ siblings seems to be more important than lineage. Maternal aunts have the strongest influence on fertility transmission, followed by paternal aunts, maternal uncles, and paternal uncles. Analogous to the earlier lineage associations, women’s fertility shows slightly larger associations with that of aunts than does men’s fertility, while men’s fertility has similar associations with that of both aunts and uncles. An exception is men and maternal uncles, where there is a strong association. Overall, fertility associations are larger for women, female kin, and matrilineal kin. The results therefore are broadly in line with the second hypothesis, even though in all cases the patterns by sex are rather weak.

Patterns do not seem to vary by birth order of the index person. In separate models by birth order, the extent and pattern of the transmission was largely unaffected. Contrary to earlier findings, first-born children had slightly smaller transmission rates than later-born children. Educational level has a considerable effect on fertility. Covariates of education have a large effect on risk of first, second, and third birth, suggesting that the observed intergenerational transmission is not primarily mediated by intergenerational transmission of education.

To conclude, the results indicate that the strongest kin influence is on the transition to first birth. There appears to be little impact of kin on the transition to second birth, but there is an influence on the transition to the third. Overall, the influences on completed fertility of all categories of parents’ siblings and grandparents are largely homogeneous. While there are variations by lineage and sex, multigenerational fertility patterns in Sweden appear to be largely symmetrical. Women’s fertility is slightly more influenced by that of kin than men’s. The sex of the kin also has an impact, since the fertility of female kin generally has a somewhat stronger influence. The comparison of lineage effects indicates a larger influence of maternal kin than of paternal kin. Women’s fertility has a large correlation with that of their grandparents, maternal kin, and aunts. Men’s fertility is more equally associated with the completed fertility of all the different types of kin, even if overall patterns are similar to those for women.
Paternal kin. For men, paternal and maternal kin have similar associations. The sex of the parents’ siblings has a larger female kin bias, with the fertility of aunts being more influential than that of uncles. The sex of parents’ siblings seems to be more important than lineage. Maternal aunts have the strongest influence on fertility transmission, followed by paternal aunts, maternal uncles, and paternal uncles. Analogous to the earlier lineage associations, women’s fertility shows slightly larger associations with that of aunts than does men’s fertility, while men’s fertility has similar associations with that of both aunts and uncles. An exception is men and maternal uncles, where there is a strong association. Overall, fertility associations are larger for women, female kin, and matrilineal kin. The results therefore are broadly in line with the second hypothesis, even though in all cases the patterns by sex are rather weak.

Patterns do not seem to vary by birth order of the index person. Contrary to earlier findings, first-born children had slightly smaller transmission rates than later-born children. Educational level has a considerable effect on fertility. Covariates of education have a large effect on the risk of first, second, and third birth. Covariates of kin fertility remain largely unchanged in models with and without covariates of education, suggesting that the observed intergenerational transmission is not primarily mediated by intergenerational transmission of education.

To conclude, the results indicate that the strongest kin influence is on the transition to first birth. There appears to be little impact of kin on the transition to second birth, but there is an influence on the transition to the third. Overall, the influences on completed fertility of all categories of parents’ siblings and grandparents are largely homogeneous. While there are variations by lineage and sex, multigenerational fertility patterns in Sweden appear to be largely symmetrical. Women’s fertility is slightly more influenced by that of kin than men’s. The sex of the kin also has an impact, since the fertility of female kin generally has a somewhat stronger influence. The comparison of lineage effects indicates a larger influence of maternal kin than of paternal kin. Women’s fertility has a large correlation with that of their grandparents, maternal kin, and aunts. Men’s fertility is more equally associated with the completed fertility of all the different types of kin, even if overall patterns are similar to those for women.

Finally, to estimate the marginal effect of covariates on parents, grandparents, and aunts/uncles’ completed fertility on total fertility for women, parity-conditional fertility tables were used to estimate how the observed changes in hazard rates would affect total fertility at age 37. On average, an index person with a mother who had four to five children, compared to a mother who had two children translates into an increase of 0.38 more own children at age 37. The corresponding increases for grandparents are 0.10 additional children, and, for parents’ siblings, 0.06 additional children.

The main results of the study indicate an association of fertility across three generations. Parental characteristics have the largest association with the fertility of the index population, but there is also an independent association with fertility of grandparents and parents’ siblings. The influences of extended kin are not very strong, but are consistent and significant, and support the notion of a multigenerational effect on fertility previously overlooked in demography. Holding parents’ family size constant, a positive association has been found between both the grandparents’ number of children and the aunts/uncles’ number of children, and the fertility of the index population.

Conclusions

This research suggests that, when studying fertility, a multigenerational perspective on the transmission process is important. Not only has the transmission of fertility between parents and children traditionally been downplayed, but there is also a multigenerational effect on fertility that has been largely unexplored. The lack of multigenerational research on fertility transmission is probably due to difficulties in finding suitable multigenerational data sets. The recent availability of large administrative registers and digitized historical parish records in different countries has created new opportunities for this type of research.

We have found evidence of the influence of extended kin on fertility decisions in contemporary Sweden. Our main contribution has been to demonstrate the existence of fertility transmission from grandparents and parents’ siblings that is not mediated through the immediate family of origin. Further, the study offers evidence that the effect is not mediated through education—the societal trait most strongly associated with timing of parenthood in Sweden. These findings highlight the need for more research on multigenerational associations in the social sciences as suggested by others. The association between an individual’s fertility and the completed fertility of extended kin remains significant, even when parents’ fertility is held constant. That finding differs from the results of research in economics and sociology, which found little or no effect of grandparents’ socio-economic traits on their grandchildren’s traits after controlling for the characteristics of parents.

The data, while rich in demographic information, cannot identify the different pathways that might explain the intergenerational transmission of fertility. One possibility is that the observed continuities are the result of the transmission of cultural values about childbearing in the process of socialization. The family values and traits transmitted across generations could bear directly on childbearing, but might also be related to ethnicity, religion, or other aspects of culture that are associated only in an indirect way with fertility. Another possibility is that continuities in fertility could be a result primarily of resemblance in socio-economic traits. Finally, resemblance in family size could be due to genetic heritability of preferences for children, or a genetic component related to other traits correlated with fertility. Examining the mechanisms that explain intergenerational transmission of fertility remains an important task for future research.

If the transmission of fertility norms is important in explaining an association in fertility between index persons and their extended kin, two types of socialization might be involved. One type is direct.
The contribution has been to demonstrate the existence of fertility transmission from grandparents and parents’ siblings that is not mediated through the immediate family of origin. Further, the study offers evidence that the effect is not mediated through education—the societal trait most strongly associated with the timing of parenthood in Sweden. These findings highlight the need for more research on multigenerational associations in the social sciences as suggested by Mare (2011) and others. The association between an individual’s fertility and the completed fertility of extended kin remains significant, even when parents’ fertility is held constant. That finding differs from the results of research in economics and sociology, which found little or no effect of grandparents’ socio-economic traits on their grandchildren's traits after controlling for the characteristics of parents (Warren and Hauser 1997; Jæger 2012).

The data, while rich in demographic information, cannot identify the different pathways that might explain the intergenerational transmission of fertility. One possibility is that the observed continuities are the result of the transmission of cultural values about childbearing in the process of socialization. The family values and traits transmitted across generations could bear directly on childbearing but might also be related to ethnicity, religion, or other aspects of culture that are associated only indirectly with fertility. Another possibility is that continuities in fertility could be a result primarily of resemblance in socio-economic traits. Finally, resemblance in family size could be due to genetic heritability of preferences for children or a genetic component related to other traits correlated with fertility. Examining the mechanisms that explain intergenerational transmission of fertility remains an important task for future research.

If the transmission of fertility norms is important in explaining an association in fertility between index persons and their extended kin, two types of socialization might be involved. One type is direct socialization as a consequence of frequent contact. An example is a person who, during the formative years, is in frequent contact with, say, a grandfather and through spending time with him assimilates some of the grandfather’s values about family and childbearing. The fact that support from older kin is positively associated with fertility and that family and social networks are important in fertility decisions provides evidence for this type of influence. The second type of socialization is indirect: an individual adopts the norms and values of those with an extended family as a result of being a member of one. If someone frequently meets a large number of kin of various kinds and the experience is generally positive, one possible consequence is that the individual will internalize norms and values favorable to kinship and family. The advantage of this more structural view of kinship associations is that it helps to explain how multigenerational influences can exist independent of any influence from intermediate generations.

The findings of larger intergenerational continuities for women and female/maternal kin are consistent with the popular notion that it is women who are primarily responsible for keeping family members in contact with one another in contemporary Sweden. The larger continuities found for women are consistent with the findings of previous research on both the intergenerational transmission of fertility and the effects of extended kin on fertility. Multigenerational associations remain even after taking account of the parents’ characteristics.

More research is needed to investigate the pathways of intergenerational association found in this study. Research examining the survival status, childhood characteristics, and geographical proximity of kin would be especially helpful. A better understanding of the complex relationships between the intergenerational transmission of other social traits and fertility is also needed. Also important would be research on the extent to which intergenerational continuities in fertility are mediated through union formation and the age at first parenthood of kin. The multigenerational effects that we found in Sweden are modest in size. Perhaps stronger associations would be found in an international study that encompassed more varied multigenerational living arrangements and greater socio-economic continuities.
Socialization as a consequence of frequent contact is exemplified by a person who, during their formative years, is in frequent contact with a grandfather and assimilates some of the grandfather’s values about family and childbearing. The fact that support from older kin is positively associated with fertility and that family and social networks are important in fertility decisions provides evidence for this type of influence. The second type of socialization is indirect: an individual adopts the norms and values of those with an extended family as a result of being a member of one. If someone frequently meets a large number of kin of various kinds and the experience is generally positive, it is possible that the individual will internalize norms and values favorable to kinship and family. The advantage of this more structural view of kinship associations is that it helps to explain how multigenerational influences can exist independent of any influence from intermediate generations. The relatively small differences by lineage and sex of kin might indicate that it is actually the number of kin that is influential rather than their characteristics. In other words, the individual’s adoption of preferences for a small or large family may depend primarily on the number of children produced by grandparents, aunts, uncles, parents’ siblings, and cousins, and how this affects frequency of contact with kin. 

The findings of larger intergenerational continuities for women and female/maternal kin are consistent with the popular notion that it is women who are primarily responsible for keeping family members in contact with one another in contemporary Sweden. These larger continuities found for women are consistent with the findings of previous research on both the intergenerational transmission of fertility and the effects of extended kin on fertility. Multigenerational associations remain even after taking account of the parents’ characteristics.

More research is needed to investigate the pathways of intergenerational association found in this study. Specifically, research examining the survival status, childhood characteristics, and geographical proximity of kin would be especially helpful. A better understanding of the complex relationships between the intergenerational transmission of other social traits and fertility is also needed. Also important would be research on the extent to which intergenerational continuities in fertility are mediated through union formation and the age at first parenthood of kin. The multigenerational effects found in Sweden are modest in size, and perhaps stronger associations would be found in an international study that encompassed more varied multigenerational living arrangements and greater socio-economic continuities.
Kramer, K. L. 2010. Cooperative breeding and its significance to the demographic success of humans, Annual Review of Anthropology 39: 417-436.
Kravdal, Ø. 2002. Is the previously reported increase in second- and higher-order birth rates in Norway and Sweden from the mid-1970s real or a result of inadequate estimation methods, Demographic Research 6(9): 241-262.
Kreyenfeld, M. 2002. Time-squeeze, partner effect or self-selection? An investigation into the positive effect of women’s education on second birth risks in West Germany, Demographic Research 7(2): 15-48.
Lam, D. 1986. The dynamics of population growth, differential fertility, and inequality, American Economic Review 76(5): 1103-1116.
Langford, C. M. and C. Wilson. 1985. Is there a connection between a woman’s fecundity and that of her mother?, Journal of Biosocial Science 17(4): 437-443.
Lundholm, E. and G. Malmberg. 2009. Between elderly parents and grandchildren: geographic proximity and trends in four-generation families, Journal of Population Ageing 2(3): 121-137.
Lyngstad, T. H. and A. Prskawetz. 2010. Do siblings’ fertility decisions influence each other?, Demography 47(4): 923-934.
Malmberg, G. and A. Pettersson. 2007. Distance to elderly parents: analyses of Swedish register data, Demographic Research 17(23): 679-704.
Mare, R. D. 1997. Differential fertility, intergenerational educational mobility, and racial inequality, Social Science Research 26(3): 263-291.
Mare, R. D. 2011. A multigenerational view of inequality, Demography 48(1): 1-23.
Murphy, M. 1999. Is the relationship between fertility of parents and children really weak?, Social Biology 46(1/2): 122-145.
Murphy, M. and L. B. Knudsen. 2002. The intergenerational transmission of fertility in contemporary Denmark: the effects of number of siblings (full and half), birth order, and whether male or female, Population Studies 56(3): 235-248.
Murphy, M. and D. Wang. 2003. The impact of intergenerationally-transmitted fertility and nuptuality on population dynamics in contemporary populations, in J. L. Rodgers and H.-P. Kohler (eds.), Biodemography of Human Reproduction and Fertility. Boston: Kluwer Academic, pp. 209-228.
Murphy, M. and D. L. Wang. 2001. Family-level continuities in childbearing in low-fertility societies, European Journal of Population 17(1): 75-96.
Murphy, M. 2011. Long term effects of the demographic transition on family and kinship networks in Britain, Population and Development Review 37(Suppl. s1): 55-80.
Murphy, M. 2012. Intergenerational fertility correlations in contemporary developing countries, American Journal of Human Biology 24(5): 696-704.
Pashos, A. and D. H. McBurney. 2008. Kin relationships and the caregiving biases of grandparents, aunts, and uncles - a two-generational questionnaire study, Human Nature 19(3): 311-330.
Pearson, K., A. Lee, and L. Bramley-Moore. 1899. Mathematical contributions to the theory of evolution. VI. Genetic (reproductive) selection: inheritance of fertility in man, and of fecundity in thoroughbred racehorses, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series A 192: 257-330.
Pluzhnikov, A., D. K. Nolan, Z. Tan, M. S. McPeek, and C. Ober. 2007. Correlation of intergenerational family sizes suggests a genetic component of reproductive fitness, The American Journal of Human Genetics 81(1): 165-169.
Pollet, T. V., M. Nelissen, and D. Nettle. 2009. Lineage-based differences in grandparental investment: evidence from a large British cohort study, Journal of Biosocial Science 41(3): 355-379.
Preston, S. H. 1976. Family sizes of children and family sizes of women, Demography 13(1): 105-114.
Puur, A., L. Sakkeus, A. Põldma, and A. Herm. 2011. Intergenerational family constellations in contemporary Europe: evidence from the Generations and Gender Survey, Demographic Research 25(4): 135-172.
Reher, D., J. Ortega, and A. Sanz-Gimeno. 2008. Intergenerational transmission of reproductive traits in Spain during the demographic transition, Human Nature 19(1): 23-43.
Rodgers, J. L., H.-P. Kohler, K. O. Kyvik, and K. Christensen. 2001. Behavior genetic modeling of human fertility: findings from a contemporary Danish twin study, Demography 38(1): 29-42.
Rossi, A. S. and P. H. Rossi. 1990. Of Human Bonding: Parent-Child Relations Across the Life Course. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Schneider, D. M. and C. B. Cottrell. 1975. The American Kin Universe: A Genealogical Study. Chicago: Department of Anthropology, University of Chicago.
Schneider, D. M. and R. T. Smith. 1978. Class Differences in American Kinship. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Sear, R. and D. Coall. 2011. How much does family matter? Cooperative breeding and the demographic transition, Population and Development Review 37(Suppl. s1): 81-112.
Steenhof, L. and A. C. Liefbroer. 2008. Intergenerational transmission of age at first birth in the Netherlands for birth cohorts born between 1935 and 1984: evidence from municipal registers, Population Studies 62(1): 69-84.
Thornton, A. 1980. The influence of first generation fertility and economic status on second generation fertility, Population & Environment 3(1): 51-72.
Tymicki, K. 2004. Kin influence on female reproductive behavior: the evidence from reconstitution of the Bejsce parish registers, 18th to 20th centuries, Poland, American Journal of Human Biology 16(5): 508-522.
Tymicki, K. 2008. When do kinsmen really help? Examination of cohort and parity-specific kin effects on fertility behavior. The case of the Bejsce parish register reconstitution study, 17th-20th centuries, Poland, in T. Bengtsson and G. P. Mineau (eds.), Kinship and Demographic Behavior in the Past. New York: Springer, pp. 135-154.
Uhlenberg, P. and B. G. Hammill. 1998. Frequency of grandparent contact with grandchild sets: six factors that make a difference, Gerontologist 38(3): 276-285.
Van de Kaa, D. J. 1987. Europe’s second demographic transition, Population Bulletin 42(1): 1-59.
Warren, J. R. and R. M. Hauser. 1997. Social stratification across three generations: new evidence from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study, American Sociological Review 62(4): 561-572.
Wrong, D. H. 1980. Class Fertility Trends in Western Nations. New York: Arno Press.
Young, M. D. and P. Willmott. 1957. Family and Kinship in East London. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.