The educational gradient in marital disruption: A meta-analysis of European research findings
Anna Matysiak, Marta Styrc & Daniele Vignoli

A large number of empirical studies have investigated the effects of women’s education on union dissolution in Europe, but results have varied substantially. This paper seeks to assess the relationship between educational attainment and the incidence of marital disruption by systematizing the existing empirical evidence. A quantitative literature review (a meta-analysis) was conducted to investigate the temporal change in the relationship, net of inter-study differences. The results point to a weakening of the positive educational gradient in marital disruption over time and even to a reversal in the direction of this gradient in some countries. The findings also show that the change in the educational gradient can be linked to an increase in access to divorce. Finally, the results suggest that women’s empowerment has played an important role in changing the educational gradient, while the liberalization of divorce laws has not.

Keywords: marital disruption; education; socio-economic status; meta-analysis; marriage; social change

Introduction

Europe has witnessed a substantial increase in the incidence of marital disruption in recent decades. This increase has been greatest in Nordic countries, followed by Western and Central and Eastern European (CEE) countries. The rates are lowest in the Mediterranean countries of Europe, but even there the increase in marital disruption has accelerated over the past decade.

A substantial body of research has been conducted in response to these developments, with the goal of learning more about the correlates, if not the determinants, of marital disruption. One of the most important subjects of research has been the role of women’s education. This factor has attracted considerable attention, in part because it is a valid surrogate for hard-to-measure concepts like opportunity costs, but also because it is a marker of individual autonomy, intellectual abilities, and free-thinking. Yet despite the acknowledged importance of women’s education, there is considerable controversy about the educational gradient in marital instability, that is, whether the relationship between education level and the incidence of marital disruption is positive or negative. The economic theory formulated by Becker predicted that highly educated women would be more likely to disrupt their marriages, because they tend to gain less from role specialization within a couple and to be more economically independent of their spouses than their less educated counterparts. Others have argued, however, that the greater earning potential of highly educated women has stabilized marriages in modern societies. Recently, scholars have emphasized the role of contextual factors in shaping the relationship between women’s educational attainment and marital stability. Specifically, it has been suggested that with the eradication of the economic, legal, and social barriers to divorce, together with changes in the social and economic roles of women, there has been a weakening in the positive educational gradient in marital disruption, or even a reversal.

Empirical studies have given inconsistent results on how women’s educational attainment affects marital stability. While some studies have shown that highly educated women are more likely than less educated women to divorce, other studies have yielded contrary results. Only a few researchers have considered the effects of the contextual factors mentioned above on the educational gradient of marital disruption. The most comprehensive contribution to this debate was made by Härkönen and Dronkers, who analysed cross-country and temporal variations in marital stability by comparing several marriage cohorts in 17 countries using data from the Fertility and Family Survey (FFS). They found cross-country variation in the association between women’s educational attainment and marital disruption, and provided evidence of a temporal shift towards a more negative educational gradient in marital instability in nine countries. They also demonstrated that this shift was mainly driven by social changes towards more unconventional family behaviours (cohabitation, non-marital childbearing, and marital disruption).

The purpose of the study reported here was to explore further the educational gradient in marital disruption, and investigate the factors responsible for its variation over time and space. To do this we undertook a meta-analysis of published research on the impact of women’s educational attainment on marital disruption in Europe. With this method, it was possible to take advantage of the abundance of empirical findings obtained using various data sets and a wide variety of research methods. The crucial advantage of a meta-analysis over a single comparative study is the greater statistical power of its estimates and the generality of its findings, even though each component study is specific to a particular set of circumstances and based on certain assumptions. Thus, this paper contributes to knowledge about the educational gradient in marital disruption in European countries by providing an integration and systematization of the quantitative findings of existing comparative studies, thereby making it possible to generalize about their findings.

Hoem et al. (1992), Poortman and Kalmijn (2002), and De Rose and Di Cesare (2007) present one set of findings; however, other studies have yielded contrary results (e.g., Trussell et al. (1992), Berrington and Diamond (1999), Boyle et al. (2008)). Only a few researchers have considered the effects of the contextual factors mentioned above on the educational gradient of marital disruption (Blossfeld et al. 1995; Hoem 1997; Chan and Halpin 2002; Salvini and Vignoli 2011). The most comprehensive contribution to this debate was made by Härkönen and Dronkers (2006), who analyzed cross-country and temporal variations in marital stability by comparing several marriage cohorts in 17 countries using data from the Fertility and Family Survey (FFS). They found cross-country variation in the association between women’s educational attainment and marital disruption, and provided evidence of a temporal shift towards a more negative educational gradient in marital instability in nine countries. They also demonstrated that this shift was mainly driven by social changes towards more unconventional family behaviors (cohabitation, non-marital childbearing, and marital disruption).

The purpose of the study reported here was to explore further the educational gradient in marital disruption, and investigate the factors responsible for its variation over time and space. To do this, we undertook a meta-analysis of published research on the impact of women’s educational attainment on marital disruption in Europe. With this method, it was possible to take advantage of the abundance of empirical findings obtained using various data sets and a wide variety of research methods. The crucial advantage of a meta-analysis over a single comparative study is the greater statistical power of its estimates and the generality of its findings, even though each component study is specific to a particular set of circumstances and based on certain assumptions (e.g., Shadish et al. 2002; Konstantopoulos 2006). Thus, this paper contributes to knowledge about the educational gradient in marital disruption in European countries by providing an integration and systematization of the quantitative findings of existing comparative studies, thereby making it possible to generalize about their findings.

The conceptual approach most commonly used in studies of marital disruption views divorce as a choice made by an individual after he or she has considered the utility of marriage against available alternatives (being single or being with another partner). If the individual determines that an alternative provides greater utility, the marriage is dissolved. The utility of marriage is multi-dimensional and covers emotional gains, gains related to the specialization of partners in paid and unpaid work (Becker 1981), as well as gains related to joint consumption and the pooling of resources (Oppenheimer 1994; Sigle-Rushton 2010). The type of gains derived from marriage may differ, depending on the wife’s education. On the one hand, well-educated women have lower relative gains from specializing in housework than less-educated women because they have better opportunities in the labor market (Becker 1981). On the other hand, education increases some gains from marriage. First, it improves the economic gains because a highly educated woman has a greater ability to provide income, which may reduce marital strains by improving the couple’s living standards and diversifying the risk of a job loss (Hoem 1997; Jalovaara 2003). Second, it also increases the emotional benefits of marriage because education may contribute positively to a woman’s communication skills and her ability to resolve marital conflict, making her more attractive as a marriage partner and raising the partners' personal satisfaction from the marriage (e.g., Amato 1996).

The potential divorcee must weigh the putative gains from staying married with those that appear to be offered by the alternatives of being single or with another partner. Among the considerations to be taken into account are the costs of terminating the current marriage. These costs include divorce-related legal expenses, time spent dealing with legal proceedings, and psychological costs resulting from the social stigma of marital disruption. Overall, educated women are better able to deal with the costs of marital disruption. They tend to be better equipped intellectually to understand complex divorce laws and to have a network of friends and acquaintances who might be able to help them through the process (Hoem and Hoem 1992). In addition, they are more likely to be able to cover the financial costs related to marital disruption (Aassve et al. 2007). Finally, they may have more liberal values and may therefore be less concerned about social norms (Blossfeld et al. 1995).

It is noteworthy that educational differences in the gains from marriage and the costs of marital disruption also depend on the social context of marriage (Blossfeld et al. 1995; Hoem 1997; Härkönen and Dronkers 2006; Kaplan and Stier 2010). Recent research has shown that, in modern societies, where it is common for women to work outside the home and contribute to household income, the gains from specialization are becoming less important than the gains from income pooling (Cherlin 2000; Poortman and Kalmijn 2002; Jalovaara 2003; Raz-Yurovich 2012). This change may improve the stability of marriages, especially for highly educated women, whose earnings may form a much greater contribution to the household budget than those of less educated women. The effect of this change may be reinforced by an increase in the emotional gains from marriage since similarities in economic activities and interests have been shown to be more decisive for the durability of a union than gains from specialization (Simpson and England 1981; Coltrane 2000; Sayer and Bianchi 2000; Wilcox and Nock 2006). The costs of marital disruption have also been found to vary with the social context of marriage. When the costs are high, access to divorce or separation for less educated women is restricted because they are less well equipped with the intellectual and economic resources needed for a divorce than are more educated women (Goode 1962, 1970, 1993). However, divorce or separation becomes more affordable for less educated women as the social acceptability of divorce increases, the economic activity of women becomes more common across social strata, and the legal procedures become less complicated and less costly.

Thus, overall it might be expected that the modernization of society—which has led to a decline in the gains from specialization and an increase in the other gains from marriage, as well as to a decrease in the cultural and economic costs of marital disruption, and the legal costs of divorce or formal separation—would weaken, if not reverse, the positive association between higher education and greater marital disruption. The rise in women’s employment may have played a crucial role in weakening that educational gradient, for at least two reasons. First, the increasing participation of women in paid employment reflects a decline in the gains from specialization in marriage relative to the gains from income pooling. Second, the rise in women’s labor force participation improves the chances of the less educated finding paid employment, thus eliminating part of the economic barrier to dissolving an unhappy marriage. The other factor that may have contributed to a change in the educational gradient is the introduction of legal reforms that have made divorce easier. Research findings have shown that the liberalization of divorce laws leads to an increase in divorce rates, although the extent of this growth seems to depend on the stage of the liberalization process. It has been found that being able to obtain a divorce without the consent of the other partner has a significant impact on divorce rates (Friedberg 1998; González and Viitanen 2009), but because this is usually allowed before its introduction as a legal right, the latter usually has no effect (Kneip and Bauer 2009). The liberalization of divorce laws may have made divorce easier, particularly for the less educated, as easier divorce procedures are less costly and less difficult to understand.

The theoretical framework outlined above led to the formulation of the following three-stage strategy of testing hypotheses about the temporal change in the educational gradient of divorce and the factors that contribute to it. The first stage involved testing whether the available evidence confirms that there has been a weakening of the positive educational gradient over time (H1), as suggested by the changes in the distribution of gains from marriage by educational status and the weakening of barriers to dissolving unhappy marriages. The second stage entailed verifying whether the change in the educational gradient can be attributed to an increase in access to divorce (H2). In the third stage, the issue investigated was whether the weakening of the positive educational gradient can be linked to a change in the economic position of women in society, reflected in an increase in the participation of women in the labor force (H3). This final stage also comprised an exploration of whether the positive educational gradient becomes weaker with a liberalization of divorce laws (H4).

Meta-analysis has increasingly been employed in the social sciences (Vemer et al. 1989; Amato and Keith 1991; Twenge et al. 2003; Waldforf and Pillsung 2005; Weichselbaumer and Winter-Ebmer 2005; Wagner and Weiss 2006; Proulx et al. 2007; Matysiak and Vignoli 2008; Jose et al. 2010). This form of analysis was developed to synthesize, combine, and interpret research evidence from different studies of the same topic. The method offers a clear and systematic way of comparing the results of different studies, standardized for inter-study differences. To start with, all research papers on the topic of interest are reviewed and those that satisfy specified criteria of comparability are selected for the meta-analysis. Next, the estimated coefficients from each study are recalculated in a standardized way to give comparable indicators (known as effect sizes) of the magnitude of the association between each independent variable of interest and the dependent variable. Finally, these effect sizes are combined into single summary indicators. If the computed indicators are very heterogeneous, regression techniques are applied to account for inter-study differences.

A crucial step in carrying out a meta-analysis is defining the set of research studies to be reviewed (Lipsey and Wilson 2001, p. 16). In that process, researchers must balance the desire to collect the widest possible range of studies against considerations of comparability and focus. Although a meta-analysis should have the most comprehensive selection possible of studies on the topic of interest, the studies should also fall within a well-defined range and should not be too heterogeneous (Blettner et al. 1999). In the meta-study presented here, the main focus was on the studies that followed women from a given point in a union (most often its formation) until its disruption (through separation or divorce), or until the end of the observation period. These studies made use of panel or retrospective data, and applied statistical methods that accounted for the duration of the analyzed process, as well as for the sequence of analyzed events. Although the primary purpose of the meta-study was to investigate the effects of women's educational attainment on marital stability, also included in the analysis were the results of studies that had encompassed consensual unions and marriages in a single model; marriages constituted the vast majority of unions in these studies. Studies that focused solely on non-marital unions were not included in the meta-analysis. Finally, the meta-study was restricted to studies in European countries because they display an interesting variation in divorce patterns and women's roles, while also sharing certain economic, social, and cultural characteristics that minimize the heterogeneity of the research findings and facilitate their interpretation. Limiting the study to Europe had the practical advantage that macro-level indicators describing the social context of marriage were available for all countries.

References to papers reporting appropriate studies were identified by a search of Web of Knowledge (WoK), an international research database. Next, references reported in these papers were checked and experts were asked for recommendations. Published research based on European analyses was included up to 2010. The search of WoK was performed over 2 months, starting from the middle of September 2010. To ensure that the collection included a representative sample of high-quality studies, only published papers and chapters in books and monographs were considered; working papers and internal research reports were disregarded. The search was conducted using a combination of selected general keywords (‘divorce’ OR ‘union dissolution’ OR ‘union disruption’ OR ‘union breakdown’ OR ‘marital instability’ OR ‘marital stability’ OR ‘marriage stability’ OR ‘marriage instability’). The search was stopped when, after the different keywords had been combined and new ones added, only papers already selected were obtained. Only papers in English, German, Italian, and Polish were considered in the first stage. In the second stage, several European experts in divorce research were asked for their recommendations of publications not identified by our search. The omission of studies published in other languages may have led to an under-representation of some countries in the analysis. This is a common problem in literature reviews. On the other hand, no studies of this kind were found in the literature sources consulted.

Using this search strategy, 74 potentially suitable studies were identified. Nine of these were eliminated because they included men and women in a single model, with no specific control for women’s education. A further twelve studies were excluded for reasons of incomparability. For example, in nine German studies the highest educational level category did not distinguish between levels of education above passing the final exam at the end of higher secondary school (Abitur). Three more studies were dropped because educational level, as defined, could not be used for the meta-study; either it was included as a variable in a pooled sample of several countries or with levels that were not explained. After the exclusions 53 studies remained, of which 15 were specifically devoted to testing the effect of women’s education on the risk of marital disruption.
A form of analysis was developed in order to synthesize, combine, and interpret research evidence from different studies of the same topic. The method offers a clear and systematic way of comparing the results of different studies, standardized for inter-study differences. To start with, all research papers on the topic of interest are reviewed and those that satisfy specified criteria of comparability are selected for the meta-analysis. Next, the estimated coefficients from each study are recalculated in a standardized way to give comparable indicators (known as effect sizes) of the magnitude of the association between each independent variable of interest and the dependent variable. Finally, these effect sizes are combined into single summary indicators. If the computed indicators are very heterogeneous, regression techniques are applied in order to account for inter-study differences.

A crucial step in carrying out a meta-analysis is defining the set of research studies to be reviewed. In that process, researchers must balance the desire to collect the widest possible range of studies against considerations of comparability and focus. Although a meta-analysis should include the most comprehensive selection possible of studies on the topic of interest, the studies should also fall within a well-defined range and not be too heterogeneous. In the meta-study presented here, the main focus was on studies that followed women from a given point in a union (most often its formation) until its disruption (through separation or divorce), or until the end of the observation period. These studies made use of panel or retrospective data, and applied statistical methods that accounted for the duration of the analyzed process, as well as for the sequence of analyzed events.

Although the primary purpose of the meta-study was to investigate the effects of women’s educational attainment on marital stability, also included in the analysis were the results of studies that had encompassed consensual unions and marriages in a single model; marriages constituted the vast majority of unions in these studies. Studies that focused solely on non-marital unions were not included in the meta-analysis. Finally, the meta-study was restricted to studies in European countries because they display an interesting variation in divorce patterns and women’s roles, while also sharing certain economic, social, and cultural characteristics that minimize the heterogeneity of the research findings and facilitate their interpretation. Limiting the study to Europe had the practical advantage that macro-level indicators describing the social context of marriage were available for all countries.
Variable was also taken into account in the meta-regression.

A second problem was the lack of standard errors or other statistics which would have made it possible to calculate standard errors (e.g., t-statistics or at least p-values). Following the literature on meta-analysis, the following assumptions were made. When the result was marked significant and no other details were available, the p-value was set equal to 0.05. When the result was not significant and when the upper limit was 0.05, the p-value was set at 0.55. When the significance was marked with stars only, it was assumed that the p-value was equal to the midpoint of its interval.

In the first stage, a descriptive analysis of the effect sizes was conducted. Even at this early stage, an attempt was made to evaluate the direction and magnitude of the educational gradient in marital disruption. The question of whether the gradient had undergone any temporal changes was also investigated. For the purposes of descriptive analyses, the European countries were grouped into four clusters: Nordic countries, Continental European countries and the UK, CEE countries, and Southern Europe. These four country groups differ in family regime and level of women’s labour supply.

The effect sizes were tested for homogeneity using the homogeneity test proposed by Hedges and Olkin (1985). The test confirmed the expectation that there would be a large variation in the estimated effect sizes. The source of the variation lay in the differences in the social context of marriage, as well as in the particular characteristics of the original studies, including differences in the measurement of educational level. Therefore, in the second stage, a series of meta-regressions were performed. In this case, θi from formula (1) is expressed as θi = Xβ+ηi where ηi ~ N(0, τ2) and X represents the set of considered regressors.

The major explanatory covariate in the meta-regressions was the midpoint of the calendar period covered by the study. A series of variables was introduced into the meta-regression to describe the characteristics of the original studies, variables that could have affected the estimation of educational differences in divorce risk. These were: (1) sample design (i.e., birth cohorts, marital cohorts, and observation over a certain period of time); (2) union type covered by the study (focus on marriages only, versus all unions); (3) method (discrete or continuous event history analysis); (4) control covariates used in original studies (i.e., educational homogamy, child-related factors, including the ages, number, and sex of any children, as well as whether the children were conceived, or born, before marriage; the socio-economic status of the woman, including her economic activity and income; and the perception of justice and fairness in the gender division of unpaid work); and (5) the measurement of the educational level (continuous or categorical measurement; inclusion of lower secondary education into the low education category; a woman’s education introduced as part of a combined category with her partner’s). All but two characteristics of the original studies appeared to be insignificant. The two significant covariates were the union type covered by the study and the introduction of a woman’s education in interaction with her partner’s. Only these two covariates were retained in the final models.

In the meta-study, it was considered desirable to control for whether the researchers in the original studies accounted for selection into marriage. A failure to take this issue into consideration might have affected the effect sizes, since women differ in their marriage propensity with respect to educational attainment. Unfortunately, because only two studies were found that considered selectivity into marriage based on education, it was not possible to account for this factor in our meta-regression.

According to the study by Bernardi and Martínez-Pastor, self-selection of highly educated women into marriage does not bias the estimate of the effect of women’s education on marital disruption.

Thus, the basic meta-regression contained calendar period, union type, and the control for educational measurement (interaction of a woman’s education with her partner’s). This model was estimated in order to investigate the hypothesis about the weakening of the positive educational gradient with time. In the next stage, the model was extended with certain contextual indicators to address the remaining research hypotheses. Because these indicators were strongly correlated with one another, they were introduced into separate models in order to avoid problems of multi-collinearity.

First, the total divorce rate (TDR) was added to the basic model in order to test the hypothesis, which proposed that the weakening of the educational gradient was linked to the improved access to divorce. Because this indicator reflects the intensity of divorce, it captures legal, normative, and behavioral changes. It was introduced into the model as a computed average over the time period of the study.

Second, the hypothesis about the link between the change in the educational gradient and the increase in women’s economic and social independence was addressed. As for the TDR, the average values of women’s labour force participation rates over the time period of the study were computed and added to the basic model. Finally, the hypothesis about the link between the weakening of the positive educational gradient and the liberalization of divorce laws was investigated. For this purpose, a set of variables was introduced into the basic models that captured the proportion of time covered by the study during which a particular divorce law was in force. This model was estimated for effect sizes that referred to marriage only.

The robustness of the meta-regression estimates was verified in a set of sensitivity tests. The meta-regressions were estimated a further four independent times, with particular observations being omitted from the meta-sample each time. In the first stage, data for Sweden were dropped. It was therefore possible to confirm that the findings were not driven by patterns in the data observed in a country that dominated in the meta-sample. In the second stage, the effect sizes from the study which contained a large number of estimates and which showed a reversal in the educational gradient of marital disruption, were removed. In the third stage, the studies which originally measured a woman’s educational attainment as number of years spent in education, or which interacted with her husband’s educational level, were eliminated. This made it possible to test the robustness of the findings to the way educational attainment had been measured in the original studies. Finally, the meta-sample was randomly reduced by 10 percent. The outcomes of these sensitivity tests are available upon request. The results largely correspond to the estimates from the models estimated on the full sample, which supports the robustness of the meta-findings.

Descriptive findings

The effect sizes are presented in Figures 1–4. Each figure displays effect sizes for a different country group, and within each country group, the effect sizes are ordered according to the midpoint of the time period analyzed in the original study.

The process of family destabilization and deinstitutionalization in Europe is most pronounced in the Nordic countries. This region has had the highest divorce rates on the continent since the early 1960s. Currently, around half of marriages in Nordic Europe end in divorce. The Nordic countries are the part of the continent where the liberalization of divorce laws had proceeded the most quickly, and where de jure unilateral divorce laws were first introduced. This country group also stands out in Europe for the high labor force participation of its women, which is supported by public policies and is socially accepted. The shift towards an egalitarian division of labor took place in this part of Europe relatively early. Given the theoretical premises outlined above, it might be expected that the legal, economic, and social costs of marital disruption, as well as the gains from specialization, would be relatively low in Nordic countries, while the gains from income pooling and the emotional gains would be high. Consistent with this expectation, the meta-results indicate that the average effect of education on marital disruption for all collected studies for the Nordic countries is significantly negative.

However, it should be noted that the effect was positive in the past and only changed its sign with time. This temporal change in the sign of the effect size was observed for the whole group of countries, as well as for individual countries within it, such as Sweden, Norway, and Finland.

In contrast to the Nordic countries, in the countries of Mediterranean Europe the shift towards the process of deinstitutionalization and destabilization of families had been less pronounced, and this country group displays a relatively low incidence of new family-related behaviors, such as marital disruption, cohabitation, or out-of-wedlock childbearing and childrearing. Divorce rates in Southern Europe in the early 2000s were still below 200 per 1,000, which is one of the lowest rates on the continent. It is also notable that divorce was not allowed in this part of Europe until relatively recently: Italy and Portugal did not allow divorce until the 1970s, and divorce was not possible in Spain until the early 1980s. Southern European countries are also known for the relatively low rates of women who participate in the labor force and a relatively traditional division of household labor. Thus, it might be expected that the legal, economic, and social costs of marital disruption in this part of Europe would be relatively high, and that the gains from income pooling would be relatively low. Given this context, it is not surprising that, in contrast to the Nordic countries, the average effect of education on marital disruption for all studies for Southern Europe is significantly positive.
The gains from income pooling and the emotional gains would be high. Consistent with this expectation, the meta-results indicate that the average effect of education on marital disruption for all collected studies for the Nordic countries is significantly negative. However, it should be noted that the effect was positive in the past and only changed its sign with time. This temporal change in the sign of the effect size was observed for the whole group of countries, as well as for individual countries within it, such as Sweden, Norway, and Finland.

In contrast to the Nordic countries, in the countries of Mediterranean Europe the shift towards the process of de-institutionalization and de-stabilization of families had been less pronounced, and this country group displays a relatively low incidence of new family-related behaviours, such as marital disruption, cohabitation, or out-of-wedlock childbearing and childrearing. Divorce rates in Southern Europe in the early 2000s were still below 200 per 1,000, which is one of the lowest rates on the continent. It is also notable that divorce was not allowed in this part of Europe until relatively recently: Italy and Portugal did not allow divorce until the 1970s, and divorce was not possible in Spain until the early 1980s. Southern European countries are also known for the relatively low rates of women who participate in the labour force and a relatively traditional division of household labour. Thus, it might be expected that the legal, economic, and social costs of marital disruption in this part of Europe would be relatively high, and that the gains from income pooling would be relatively low. Given this context, it is not surprising that, in contrast to the Nordic countries, the overall effect size in Mediterranean Europe was significantly positive.

Nevertheless, a temporal change in the educational gradient of marital disruption has also been observed in this group of countries. The findings clearly illustrate that the positive educational gradient in marital disruption has been gradually weakening, and the effect came close to becoming statistically insignificant in recent studies. As in the Nordic countries, the temporal change was visible not only in the whole country cluster, but also in individual countries, such as Italy and Spain.

Continental Europe and the UK are similar to Nordic Europe in the extent of marital disruption, although divorce rates in this group of countries seem to be slightly more heterogeneous. At the beginning of the 2000s, their TDRs ranged between 0.37 (France and the Netherlands) and 0.54 (Belgium). The divorce laws are not as liberal in these countries as in Nordic countries, but they are not as strict as in the Mediterranean countries. Continental European countries also occupy an intermediate position between the Nordic countries and those of Southern Europe in the levels of women’s labour force participation, public and social support for working parents, and gender equality. Nevertheless, strong heterogeneity exists, with Belgium, France, the Netherlands, and the UK displaying higher levels of economic activity among women, better welfare support for combining work and family, and greater acceptance of women participating in the economy, than in Austria or Germany. To conclude, the legal, economic, and social costs of marital disruption, as well as the gains from specialization in this part of Europe might be expected to be lower than in Southern Europe and higher than in the Nordic countries. Consistent with this expectation, the overall effect size in Continental Europe and the UK was found to be close to zero, a value that lies between those observed for the Nordic and the Mediterranean countries. In addition, in this country cluster some signs of a temporal change in the educational gradient in marital disruption were apparent, although they were much weaker than in Southern or Nordic Europe.

Finally, the last country group comprises CEE countries. This cluster of countries displays the highest variation in marital disruption; the average TDR is around 0.35. However, rates in the Czech Republic, Hungary, and almost all of the post-Soviet countries exceed this average, reaching levels observed in Northern or Western Europe; whereas in Poland or Romania, marital disruption is below average. In addition, a characteristic feature of the countries of CEE is the widespread acceptance of women’s economic roles, coupled with a traditional perception of women as the main care providers. In these countries, women have been relatively active in the labour force for several decades, even though welfare support for working parents deteriorated in the early 1990s. On average, this country group could be expected to display relatively high gains from income pooling, as well as moderate social, economic, and legal costs of marital disruption, but with these costs varying considerably from country to country. Unfortunately, it was impossible to detect any temporal pattern in the effect size, since the studies for these countries did not differ in the periods covered. Except for two studies for Russia, all the others were analyzed using FFS data, and mostly covered the period from the 1960s until the early 1990s, though there was some slight variation in the starting and end points of the observation periods caused by differences in the timing of the FFS fieldwork. The only conclusion that can be made at this point is that no significant educational differences in risks of marital disruption were found across the countries of CEE during the post-war period.
The highest variation in marital disruption occurs in Central and Eastern Europe (CEE), with average Total Divorce Rates (TDR) around 0.35. However, Czech Republic, Hungary, and nearly all post-Soviet nations exceed this average, matching levels typically seen in Northern or Western Europe; whereas countries like Poland and Romania exhibit below-average marital disruption rates. A distinguishing trait of CEE countries is the extensive acceptance of women’s economic roles alongside their traditional view as primary caregivers. Women in these regions have been active in the labor force for decades, even as welfare support for working parents deteriorated in the early 1990s. Generally, this group of countries might demonstrate relatively high benefits from income pooling, alongside moderate social, economic, and legal costs of marital disruption, although these costs vary significantly across countries. Unfortunately, no consistent temporal pattern in effect size was discernable through the studies which did not vary over time. The only discernable factor was that no substantial educational differences in risks of marital disruption were identified across the CEE during the post-war period.

The relationship between access to divorce and educational gradients in marital dissolution is also noteworthy. The total (period) divorce rate (TDR) was introduced in the base model to inspect its effect on the educational gradient of marital disruption. Subsequent models considering only marriages show a significant negative impact of TDR on the educational gradient, indicating that increased access to divorce likely contributes to the weakening of the once positive gradient of marital disruption. This change supports the hypothesis that increased divorce accessibility contributes to the observed temporal decline in the educational gradient.

These findings are coherent with descriptive analyses and meta-models that suggest a reduction in the positive educational gradient in marital disruption over time, particularly in regions where barriers to divorce are lower and female labor force participation is higher and more accepted.
The model is consistent with the descriptive findings on the differences in effect sizes across country groups, yielding the smallest educational gradient for the Nordic countries and the largest for the Southern European countries. Overall, the descriptive analyses in Figures 1–4 and the meta-models M1–M2 provide clear support for hypothesis H1 on the weakening of the positive educational gradient in marital disruption over time. They also suggest that the gradient is less positive, or even negative, in those regions of Europe where the barriers to disrupting a marriage are weaker, and where the labor force participation of women is greater and more socially accepted. In the following sections of the paper, the role of women’s participation in the labor force and the liberalization of divorce laws in the change in educational gradient are tested in greater depth.

Access to divorce was measured using the total (period) divorce rate (TDR). In the first stage, the TDR was introduced into the basic model M1, followed by a model for studies that analyzed only marriages, excluding those that investigated union disruption in general. The meta-models M3a and M3b indicate a large and significantly negative effect of TDR on the effect size, suggesting that better access to divorce is linked to a weakening of the educational gradient of marital disruption. Furthermore, controlling for TDR, the analysis shows that the effect of calendar year becomes insignificant, fully accounting for the temporal decline in the educational gradient.

Women’s social and economic independence is the next area of focus. The decline in the educational gradient in marital disruption may be partly due to the increasing economic and social independence of women, as measured by the participation rate of women in the labor force. Irrespective of the focus of the original studies, findings show that women’s labor force participation is negatively correlated with the educational gradient of marriage disruption. This result supports hypothesis H3. The introduction of the participation rate of women in the labor force into the model leads to a smaller coefficient for the temporal change in the educational gradient, although the effect of calendar year on effect size remains significant. This suggests that an increase in the participation of women in the labor force only partly explains the temporal decline in the educational gradient.

Finally, we address hypothesis H4, proposing that the decline in the educational gradient in marital disruption could be linked to a weakening in the legal barriers to ending a marriage. This hypothesis was tested with a meta-sample of studies that investigated the disruption of marital unions only. According to the results, neither the introduction of divorce based on mutual consent nor the implementation of de jure unilateral divorce is significantly correlated with the educational gradient in marital disruption. The introduction of these legal variables into the model does not affect the coefficient for the effect of calendar year on educational gradient, providing no support for hypothesis H4.

The relationship between educational attainment and marital dissolution has attracted considerable attention among researchers. The meta-analysis reported in this paper was undertaken to remedy the lack of generalized findings, as micro-level studies often focused on one country or issue. The results are robust to the type of data and analytical methods employed in the original studies. Despite limitations due to data constraints, this research implies a reversal in the formerly positive educational gradient in marital disruption. It appears closely associated with the changes in the structure of gains from marriage brought about by factors such as an increase in the participation of women in the labor market and an eradication of the barriers to disrupting a marriage. This may eventually lead the positive educational gradient of marital disruption to decline, vanish, or even reverse in all the European countries where marital instability is currently increasing substantially.
Disruption is associated with an increase in the participation of women in the labour force, the driving force of the change is not clear. It could be linked to an increase in the earning power of highly educated women and the pooling of resources, or an increase in the economic independence of less educated women. The relative importance of these factors would be an interesting subject for future research. Despite these limitations, the major implication of this research is that a reversal has occurred in the formerly positive educational gradient in marital disruption, and that it has been closely associated with the change in the structure of gains from marriage brought about by two factors: an increase in the participation of women in the labour market and an eradication of the barriers to disrupting a marriage. Thus, the change from the positive relationship between women’s educational attainment and divorce risk (which has yet to occur in some countries) is a consequence of the changes in women’s economic and social roles, together with the changes in the material and social costs of divorce yielded by increases in educational attainment. Once the idea that women can be income providers becomes more socially accepted, women’s earnings start to form an important contribution to the household budget, and the material and social costs of marital disruption begin to fade. It is a noteworthy finding that unions formed by highly educated women are not necessarily less stable than those formed by less educated women. This may be for one or more of the following reasons: they tend to have a better position in the marriage market before marriage; they are less exposed to the strains imposed by shortage of money; and they are often better able to resolve interpersonal conflicts. In fact, rising levels of marital stability among couples with high socio-economic status are already being observed (Esping-Andersen 2009; Bernardi and Martínez-Pastor 2011; Salvini and Vignoli 2011). On the basis of our findings, it is plausible to predict that, over time, the positive educational gradient of marital disruption will decline, vanish, or even reverse from positive to negative in all the European countries where marital instability is currently increasing substantially.
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta. 2009. The Incomplete Revolution: Adapting Welfare States to Women’s New Roles. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.

Finnäs, Flajar. 1997. Social integration, heterogeneity and divorce: the case of the Swedish-speaking population in Finland, Acta Sociologica 40: 263–277.

Fischer, Tamar and Aart C. Liefbroer. 2006. For richer, for poorer: the impact of macroeconomic conditions on union dissolution rates in the Netherlands 1972–1996, European Sociological Review 22(5): 519–532.

Friedberg, Leora. 1998. Did unilateral divorce raise divorce rates? Evidence from panel data, American Economic Review 88(3): 608–627.

Gabrielli, Giuseppe and Daniele Vignoli. 2013. The breaking-down of marriage in Italy: trends and trendsetters, Population Review 52(1): 87–109.

Gauthier, Anne H. 1996. The State and the Family: A Comparative Analysis of Family Policies in Industrialized Countries. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

González, Liberdad and Tarja K. Viitanen. 2009. The effect of divorce laws on divorce rates in Europe, European Economic Review 5: 127–138.

Goode, William J. 1962. Marital satisfaction and instability: a cross-cultural class analysis of divorce rates, in R. Bendix and S. M. Lipset (eds.), Class, Status, and Power. Social Stratification in Comparative Perspective. New York: The Free Press, pp. 377–387.

Goode, William J. 1970. World Revolution and Family Patterns. New York: The Free Press.

Goode, William J. 1993. World Changes in Divorce Patterns. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Hall, Anja. 1997. ‘Drum prüfe, wer sich ewig bindet’. Eine empirische Untersuchung zum Einfluss vorehelichen Zusammenlebens auf das Scheidungsrisiko, Zeitschrift für Soziologie 26(4): 275–295.

Hansen, Hans-Tore. 2005. Unemployment and martial dissolution: a panel data study of Norway, European Sociological Review 21(2): 135–148.

Hantrais, Linda. 2005. Living as a family in Europe, in L. Hantrais, D. Philipov, and F. C. Billari (eds.), Policy Implications of Changing Family Formation. Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing, pp. 117–181.

Härkönen, Juho. 2005. Divorce risk factors across Finnish marriage cohorts, 1954–1989, Yearbook of Population Research in Finland 41: 151–164.

Härkönen, Juho and Jaap Dronkers. 2006. Stability and change in the educational gradient of divorce. A comparison of seventeen countries, European Sociological Review 22(5): 501–517.

Hedges, Larry V. and Ingram Olkin. 1985. Statistical Methods for Meta-analysis. Orlando: Academic Press.

Hedges, Larry V., Elizabeth Tipton, and Matthew C. Johnson. 2010. Robust variance estimation in meta-regression with dependent effect size estimates, Research Synthesis Methods 1(1): 39–65.

Henz, Ursula and Jan O. Jonsson. 2003. Union disruption in Sweden: does economic dependency inhibit separation?, International Journal of Sociology 33(1): 3–39.

Hoem, Britta and Jan M. Hoem. 1992. The disruption of marital and non-marital unions in contemporary Sweden, in J. Trussell, R. Hankinson, and J. Tilton (eds.), Demographic Application of Event History Analysis. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 61–93.

Hoem, Jan M. 1997. Educational gradients in divorce risks in Sweden in recent decades, Population Studies 51(1): 19–27.

Jalovaara, Marika. 2001. Socio-economic status and divorce in first marriage in Finland 1991–93, Population Studies 55(2): 119–133.

Jalovaara, Marika. 2002. Socioeconomic differentials in divorce risk by duration of marriage, Demographic Research 7(16): 537–564.

Jalovaara, Marika. 2003. The joint effects of marriage partners’ socioeconomic positions on the risk of divorce, Demography 40(1): 67–81.

Jasilioniene, Aiva. 2007. Premarital Conception and Divorce Risk in Russia in Light of the GGS Data. Rostock: Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research. MPIDR Working Paper WP-2007-025.

Jensen, An-Magritt and Sten-Erik Clausen. 2003. Children and family dissolution in Norway: the impact of consensual unions, Childhood 10(1): 65–81.

Jensen, Peter and Nina Smith. 1990. Unemployment and martial dissolution, Journal of Population Economics 3(3): 215–229.

Jose, Anita, K. Daniel O'Leary, and Anne Moyer. 2010. Does premarital cohabitation predict subsequent marital stability and marital quality? A meta-analysis, Journal of Marriage and Family 72(1): 105–116.

Kalmijn, Matthijs, Paul M. De Graaf, and Anne-Rigt Poortman. 2004. Interactions between cultural and economic determinants of divorce in the Netherlands, Journal of Marriage and Family 66(1): 75–89.

Kalmijn, Matthijs and Anne-Rigt Poortman. 2006. His or hers divorce? The gendered nature of divorce and its determinants, European Sociological Review 22(2): 201–214.

Kaplan, Amit and Haya Stier. 2010. Political Economy of Family Life: Welfare Regimes, Economic Resources and Divorce. Vienna: European Population Conference.

Kiernan, Kathleen. 1991. Who divorces?, in S. McRae (ed.), Changing Britain: Families and Households in the 1990s. Oxford: University Press, pp. 377–403.

Kneip, Thorsten and Gerrit Bauer. 2009. Did unilateral divorce laws raise divorce rates in Western Europe?, Journal of Marriage and Family 71(3): 592–607.

Konstantopoulos, Spyros. 2006. Fixed and Mixed Effects Models in Meta-analysis. Bonn: The Institute for the Study of Labor. IZA Discussion Papers 2198.

Liefbroer, Aart C. and Edith Dourleijn. 2006. Unmarried cohabitation and union stability: testing the role of diffusion using data from 16 European countries, Demography 43(2): 203–221.

Lipsey, Mark W. and David B. Wilson. 2001. Practical Meta-analysis. London and New Delhi: Sage.

Lobodzińska, Barbara. 1983. Divorce in Poland: its legislation, distribution and social context, Journal of Marriage and Family 45(4): 927–942.

Lück, Detley and Dirk Hofäcker. 2003. Rejection and Acceptance of the Male Breadwinner Model: Which Preferences do Women Have under Which Circumstances?. Bamberg: University of Bamberg. Globalife Working Paper 60.

Lyngstad, Torkild H. 2004. The impact of parent’s and spouses’ education on divorce rates in Norway, Demographic Research 10(5): 121–142.

Lyngstad, Torkild H. 2006. Why do couples with highly educated parents have higher divorce rates?, European Sociologica
Raz-Yurovich, Liat. 2012. Economic determinants of divorce among dual-earner couples: Jews in Israel, European Journal of Population 28(2): 177–203. Salvini, Silvana and Daniele Vignoli. 2011. Things change: women’s and men’s marital disruption dynamics in Italy during a time of social transformations, 1970–2003, Demographic Research 24(5): 145–174. Sayer, Liana C. and Suzanne M. Bianchi. 2000. Women’s economic independence and the probability of divorce: A review and reexamination, Journal of Family Issues 21(7): 906–943. Shadish, William R., Thomas D. Cook, and Donald T. Campbell. 2002. Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Designs for Generalized Causal Inference. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. Sigle-Rushton, Wendy. 2010. Men’s unpaid work and divorce: reassessing specialization and trade in British families, Feminist Economics 16 (2): 1–26. Simpson, Ida Harper and Paula England. 1981. Conjugal work roles and marital solidarity, Journal of Family Issues 2(2): 180–204. Sobotka, Tomas and Laurent Toulemon. 2008. Changing family and partnership behaviour: common trends and persistent diversity across Europe, Demographic Research 19(6): 85–138. Steele, Fiona, Constantinos Kallis, and Heather Joshi. 2006. The formation and outcomes of cohabiting and marital partnerships in early adulthood: the role of previous partnerships experience, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A - Statistics in Society 169(4): 757–779. Stevenson, B. and J. Wolfers. 2007. Marriage and divorce: changes and their driving forces, Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(2): 27–52. Svarer, Michael and Mette Verner. 2008. Do children stabilize relationships in Denmark?, Journal of Population Economics 21(2): 395–417. Syse, Astri and Øystein Kravdal. 2007. Does cancer affect the divorce rate?, Demographic Research 16(15): 469–492. Syse, Astri, Jon H. Loge, and Torkild H. Lyngstad. 2010. Does childhood cancer affect parental divorce rates? A population-based study, Journal of Clinical Oncology 28(5): 872–877. Trussell, James, German Rodriguez, and Barbara Vaughan. 1992. Union dissolution in Sweden, in J. Trussell, R. Hankinson, and J. Tilton (eds.), Demographic Applications of Event History Analysis. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 38–60. Twenge, Jean M., W. Keith Campbell, and Craig A. Foster. 2003. Parenthood and marital satisfaction: a meta-analytic review, Journal of Marriage and Family 65(3): 574–583. Verner, Elizabeth, Marilyn Coleman, Lawrence H. Ganong, and Harris Cooper. 1989. Marital satisfaction in remarriage: a meta-analysis, Journal of Marriage and Family 51(3): 713–725. Vignoli, Daniele and Irene Ferro. 2009. Rising marital disruption in Italy and its correlates, Demographic Research 20(4): 11–36. Wagner, Michael. 1997. Scheidung in Ost-und Westdeutschland: Zum Verhältnis von Ehestabilität und Sozialstruktur seit den 30er Jahren [Divorce in West and East Germany: the Interrelation between Marital Stability and Social Structure over 30 years]. Frankfurt/New York: Campus. Wagner, Michael and Bernd Weiss. 2006. On the variation of divorce risks in Europe: findings from a meta-analysis of European longitudinal studies, European Sociological Review 22(5): 483–500. Waldforf, Brigitte and Byun Pillsung. 2005. Meta-analysis of the impact of age structure on fertility, Journal of Population Economics 18: 15–40. Weichselbaumer, Doris and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer. 2005. A meta-analysis of the international gender gap, Journal of Economics Survey 19(3): 479–511. Wilcox, W. Bradford and Steven L. Nock. 2006. What’s love got to do with it? Equality, equity, commitment and women’s marital quality, Social Forces 84(3): 1321–1345. Zeman, Kryštof. 2003. Divorce and marital dissolution in the Czech Republic and in Austria - the role of premarital cohabitation. PhD Thesis, Charles University, Prague.